Paralysis is the result of nerve damage in the brain or spinal cord due to trauma, disease, or birth condition.
This chapter characterizes the primary causes.
The World Health Organization defines paralysis as a central nervous system disorder that results in difficulty or inability to move the upper or lower extremities.
According to a study of over 70,000 households initiated by the Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation, there are nearly 1 in 50 people living with paralysis—over 5.3 million people.
That means we all know someone living with paralysis.
Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a rare, recently discovered neurologic condition affecting the gray matter of the spinal cord that causes the body’s muscles and reflexes to weaken.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) began tracking AFM in 2014.
Since then, there have been 730 confirmed cases, with more than 90 percent occurring in young children.
Main symptoms include sudden weakness in the arms or legs and loss of muscle tone and reflexes.
Additionally, some people might also experience drooping eyelids, difficulty swallowing, slurred speech, numbness, an inability to urinate and pain in the arms, legs, back or neck.
Respiratory failure and neurologic symptoms, such as body temperature changes and blood pressure instability, are potentially life-threatening.
The cause of AFM remains unknown, but researchers at the CDC believe that viruses play a role.
In data gathered starting in 2014, more than 90% of patients reported a mild respiratory illness or fever before developing AFM.
Most cases developed between August and October, correlating with the period each year when many viruses, including enteroviruses, circulate.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acute Flaccid Myelitis Association (AFMA) is a non-profit organization created by parents of children with AFM.
It offers information, support, grants and advocacy. https://www.afmanow.org
Siegel Rare Neuroimmune Association (SRNA) offers information about AFM. https://wearesrna.org
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease after the New York Yankee baseball player who was diagnosed with it, is a rapidly progressive neurological disease that affects at least 16,000 Americans; roughly 5,000 new cases occur each year.
ALS belongs to a group of disorders known as motor neuron diseases.
Motor neurons are nerve cells located in the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord that serve as control units and communication links between the nervous system and the voluntary muscles of the body.
The loss of these cells causes the muscles under their control to weaken and waste away, leading to paralysis.
The average lifespan after an ALS diagnosis is three to five years, though some people live much longer.
Using a feeding tube and ventilator can help prolong life afer swallowing and respiratory muscles fail.
ALS symptoms may include frequent tripping and falling; loss of control in hands and arms; difficulty speaking, swallowing, and/or breathing; persistent fatigue; twitching; and cramping.
For unknown reasons, ALS is 20 percent more common in men than in women.
Because ALS affects motor neurons, the disease does not usually impair a person’s mind, personality, or intelligence.
It does not affect the ability to see, smell, taste, hear, or recognize touch.
People with ALS usually maintain control of eye muscles and bladder and bowel function.
There is no known cure for ALS, nor is there a therapy to prevent or reverse its course.
Riluzole is the only FDA-approved drug shown to prolong the survival of people with ALS by an average of three months.
Riluzole is believed to minimize damage to motor neurons due to the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate.
ALS patients have raised levels of glutamate in the fluid bathing the brain and spinal cord.
Riluzole may also extend the time before a person needs ventilation support.
Riluzole does not reverse the damage already done to motor neurons however, and people taking the drug must be monitored for liver damage and other possible side effects.
In 2011, the FDA approved the NeuRx Diaphragm Pacing System (DPS) for ALS patients experiencing breathing issues.
Clinical trials demonstrated that DPS neurostimulation helped ALS patients live longer and sleep better than with standard care.
www.synapsebiomedical.com (see pages 96-97 for more).
ALS researchers have identified numerous compounds that show promise for treating the disease.
Several drugs and cell therapies are currently being tested in patients.
There is strong evidence that trophic factors, molecules that nurture and protect cells, can rescue dying neurons in animal models of ALS.
Targeted delivery to a vulnerable cell may be beneficial but the work is still underway.
A drug called arimoclomol, originally developed to treat diabetic complications, inhibited progression of ALS in a mouse model of the disease.
Arimoclomol is thought to amplify “molecular chaperone” proteins, normally found in all cells of the body; these cells may protect a motor nerve cell against toxic proteins, repairing those that are believed to cause diseases such as ALS.
Arimoclomol appears to accelerate the regeneration of previously damaged nerves in animals.
Early phase clinical trials have shown the drug to be safe in humans; more tests are ongoing for dose and treatment.
Recent mouse model studies of ALS showed dramatic benefits using a combination of drugs, including Riluzole, nimodipine (a calcium channel blocker used in the treatment of acute stroke and migraine headache) and minocycline (an antibiotic that may block inflammation).
The compounds given together appear to delay cell death, prevent nerve cell loss, and reduce inflammation.
For more on ALS clinical trials, see www.clinicaltrials.gov.
Physical or occupational therapy and special equipment can enhance independence and safety throughout the course of ALS.
Low-impact aerobic exercise such as walking, swimming, and stationary bicycling can strengthen unaffected muscles, prevent deconditioning, improve cardiovascular health, and help patients fight fatigue and depression.
Range-of-motion and stretching exercises can help prevent painful spasticity and contractures (shortening of muscles that limits joint movement).
Devices such as ramps, braces, walkers, and wheelchairs can help people conserve energy and remain mobile, while making it easier to perform activities of daily living.
People with ALS are at risk for pneumonia and pulmonary embolism.
Indicators of deteriorating respiratory status can include difficulty breathing, especially when lying down or after meals; lethargy; drowsiness; confusion; anxiety; irritability; loss of appetite; fatigue; morning headaches; and depression.
When the muscles that assist in breathing weaken, use of ventilatory assistance (intermittent positive pressure ventilation, IPPV; or bi-level positive airway pressure, BiPAP) may be used to aid breathing during sleep.
When muscles are no longer able to maintain oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, these devices may be required full-time.
Another problem common to many people with ALS is the inability to cough forcefully enough to clear away even normal amounts of mucus.
People are advised to make sure their fluid intake is sufficient to keep the secretions thin; some take an over-the-counter cough medicine containing the expectorant guaifenesin, a mucus thinner.
A weak cough can be made more effective by quad coughing (assisting a cough by applying a sort of Heimlich-like maneuver as the patient coughs), supplying fuller breaths with an ambu-bag to improve the cough, or using a device such as a “cofflator” or “in-exsufflator” (delivers deep breaths through a mask and then quickly reverses to negative pressure to simulate a cough).
While people with ALS do not overproduce saliva, their swallowing problems can create sialorrhea, or excess salivation and drooling.
Sialorrhea can be managed through diet modification, the use of a suction machine, and medications.
Spasticity is present in some people with ALS.
It causes a tightening of muscles and a stiffening of the arms, legs, back, abdomen, or neck.
It can be triggered by a simple touch and can be painful especially if it sets off muscle cramps, common in ALS because of muscle fatigue.
Cramps can be very painful but become less severe with time—weakening muscles can’t tighten into a cramp anymore.
Fasciculation (muscle twitching) is common, too; though not painful these can disrupt sleep.
While the inability to speak is not life-threatening or painful, it is a very frustrating aspect of ALS.
Assistive technology offers many solutions that help individuals communicate even as the disease progresses.
Devices range from simple call buttons and programable communication boards to equipment that magnifies a weak whisper into audible speech.
If a person can move nearly any body part, there is potential for communication.
See pages 199-204 for more information on hands-free control of cursors for communication, entertainment, and even work.
Research holds great promise for treatments for ALS, including drugs, cell transplants, gene therapy, and immune system modulation.
Technology is also providing potential gains; in recent experiments using brain waves, people who are locked-in due to ALS have learned to communicate by way of a computer using only their thoughts.
For example, trials of the BrainGate System, which implants a sensor in the brain to transmit, have shown that neural signals associated with the intent to move a limb can be “decoded” by a computer in real-time and used to operate external devices, including robot arms.
Living with ALS is challenging but can be made easier by seeking out other families who share this diagnosis.
Visit the ALS Association to find local support groups for individuals and caregivers
National Institute on Neurological Disorders and Stroke, ALS Association
ALS Association (ALSA) features news, research, support, and resources; it offers a national network of support groups, clinics, and specialty hospitals.
Since 2014, ALSA has funded over $137 million in research to identify the cause and a cure for ALS. https://www.als.org
The ALS Therapy Development Institute is a nonprofit biotechnology company working to discover treatments. https://www.als.net
Project ALS focuses on research in ALS.
Team Gleason provides adventure, technology, equipment, and care services to people living with ALS.
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are defects of the circulatory system that are believed to arise during fetal development or soon after birth.
The abnormal tangles of arteries and veins disrupt the vital cycle that would normally carry oxygen-saturated blood in arteries away from the heart to the body’s cells and return oxygen-depleted blood by way of veins to the lungs and heart.
An AVM directly connects arteries and veins, and thereby reduces oxygen to nervous system tissue and increases the risk of bleeding.
Arteriovenous malformations can form wherever arteries and veins exist.
They occur most often without symptoms.
However, AVMs that form in the brain or spinal cord can be especially problematic.
Even in the absence of bleeding or significant oxygen loss, large AVMs can damage the brain or spinal cord by their presence.
They can range in size from a fraction of an inch to more than 2.5 inches in diameter.
The larger the lesion, the greater the amount of pressure there is on surrounding brain or spinal cord structures.
AVMs of the brain or spinal cord (neurological AVMs) affect approximately 30,000 Americans.
They occur in males and females of all racial or ethnic backgrounds at roughly equal rates.
Common symptoms of AVMs are seizures and headaches.
Other neurological symptoms may include muscle weakness or paralysis in one part of the body or loss of coordination (ataxia).
Also, AVMs can cause pain or disturbances of vision or speech.
Mental confusion or hallucination is also possible.
There is evidence that AVMs may also cause subtle learning or behavioral disorders during childhood.
Diagnosis of AVM is by either computed axial tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans.
Angiography is an accurate way to get the exact location of the malformation.
A thin tube is inserted in a leg artery, threaded toward the brain, and then injected with a dye.
The scans reveal the AVM tangle.
Arteriovenous malformations can put veins under great pressure since there are no capillaries to slow blood flow.
Over time, the AVM may rupture and cause a hemorrhage.
While the risk of hemorrhage is small, the risk increases over time; treatment is usually recommended.
Surgery inside the skull may attempt to cut out or burn away the AVM with a laser.
Another option for smaller AVMs is stereotactic radiosurgery, which focuses radiation on AVM blood vessels to slowly obliterate them.
It may take from one to three years to remove the AVM.
A third treatment option is endovascular embolization, which is similar to an angiogram.
A catheter is inserted into a leg artery and threaded through the body toward the affected arteries.
A glue-like substance is injected to block key blood vessels leading to the AVM, thus reducing its size so radiosurgery or conventional surgery may treat it.
Surgery is a decision that must be made with full understanding of risks.
Untreated, AVMs may lead to serious neurological deficits or death.
Surgery on the central nervous system, however, has known risks as well; AVM surgery is invasive and can be quite complex.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Mayo Clinic, National Organization for Rare Disorders
Mayo Clinic offers many educational materials about arteriovenous malformation and provides treatment at three centers. https://www.mayoclinic.org, search arteriovenous malformation.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) offers clinical detail and resources on AVM. https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/disorders/arteriovenous-malformations-avms
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) includes AVM in its materials. https://rarediseases.org
Brachial plexus injuries are caused by excessive stretching, tearing, or other trauma to a network of nerves located between the spine and the shoulder, arm, and hand.
Symptoms may include a limp or paralyzed arm and loss of muscle control or sensation in the arm, hand, or wrist.
Chronic pain is often a concern.
Injuries often occur due to vehicular crashes, sports and recreation accidents, gunshot wounds, or surgeries; these injuries can also happen during the birth process if a baby’s shoulders become impacted, causing the brachial plexus nerves to stretch or tear.
Some brachial plexus injuries may heal without treatment; many babies improve or recover by three to four months of age.
Treatment for these injuries includes occupational or physical therapy and, in some cases, surgery.
For avulsion (tears) and rupture injuries there is no potential for recovery unless surgical reconnection is made in a timely manner.
For neuroma (scarring) and neuropraxia (stretching) injuries, the potential for recovery is encouraging; most people with neuropraxia injuries recover.
United Brachial Plexus Network, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
United Brachial Plexus Network provides support related to brachial plexus injuries. https://ubpn.org
The brain is the control center of all of the body’s functions, including conscious activities (walking, talking) and unconscious ones (breathing, digestion).
The brain also controls thought, comprehension, speech, and emotion.
Injury to the brain, whether the result of severe trauma to the skull or a closed injury in which there is no fracture or penetration, can disrupt some or all of these functions.
Each year, millions of people sustain traumatic brain injuries (TBI) in motor vehicle accidents, falls, acts of violence (including suicide), and sports injuries.
While this injury occurs across all populations, racial and ethnic minorities, service members and veterans, and survivors of domestic violence are more likely to be affected.
Men face a higher rate of TBI than females, and older adults die from this injury more than any other age group.
Alcohol is associated with up to half of all brain injuries, either in the person causing the injury or in the injured person.
People with spinal cord injury often have accompanying brain injury; this is especially true for higher cervical injuries that are close to the brain.
Enclosed within the bony framework of the skull, the brain is a gelatinous material that floats in cerebrospinal fluid, which acts as a shock absorber in rapid head movements.
Injury to the brain can be caused by a fracture or penetration of the skull (such as a vehicle accident, fall, or gunshot wound), a disease process (including neurotoxins, infection, tumors, or metabolic abnormalities), or a closed head injury such as a concussion.
The outer surface of the skull is smooth, but the inner surface is jagged—this is the cause of significant damage in closed head injuries, as the brain tissue rebounds inside the skull over rough bony structures.
With trauma, brain damage may occur at the time of impact or may develop later due to swelling (cerebral edema) and bleeding into the brain (intracerebral hemorrhage) or bleeding around the brain (epidural or subdural hemorrhage).
In a milder injury, a person might briefly lose consciousness and experience a diminished sense of their surroundings; a serious brain injury can cause disorders of consciousness that significantly, and sometimes permanently, impair responsiveness.
Coma occurs when an individual cannot be roused and their eyes remain closed.
A vegetative state, also called unresponsive wakefulness syndrome, is characterized by complete unconsciousness with periods of wakefulness and sleep, and some eye opening.
A minimally conscious state contains periods of wakefulness and some ability to respond to stimuli, such as pain or simple commands.
It is possible to recover from all disorders of consciousness, though the pace of progress will depend on the severity of injury.
A closed head injury, such as a concussion, contusion, or hematoma, can occur without leaving obvious external signs.
It is more common, and often more damaging, than a penetrating head injury, causing extensive neurologic deficits, including partial to complete paralysis; cognitive, behavioral, and memory problems; and persistent vegetative state.
Injured brain tissue can recover over time.
However, once brain tissue is dead or destroyed, there is no evidence that new brain cells form.
The process of recovery usually continues even without new cells, perhaps as other parts of the brain take over the function of the destroyed tissue.
Brain injury can have serious and lifelong effects on physical and mental functioning, including loss of consciousness, altered memory and/or personality, and partial or complete paralysis.
Common behavioral problems include verbal and physical aggression, agitation, learning difficulties, poor self-awareness, altered sexual functioning, impulsivity, and social disinhibition.
Social consequences of mild, moderate, and severe TBI are numerous, including higher risk of suicide, divorce, chronic unemployment, and substance abuse.
There is also a significant economic toll: the annual cost of acute care and rehabilitation in the United States for new cases of TBI is more than $40.6 billion.
Estimates for average lifetime cost of care for a person with severe TBI can surpass $2 million.
The rehabilitation process begins immediately after injury and is designed around individual needs.
Cognitive exercises to improve attention, memory, and executive skills are a key component of all programs.
Once memory begins to return, the rate of recovery often increases.
Ongoing challenges may include movement, memory, attention, complex thinking, speech and language, and behavioral changes; survivors often cope with depression, anxiety, loss of self-esteem, altered personality, and, in some cases, a lack of self-awareness of their deficits.
Psychotherapy can treat depression and loss of self-esteem.
Medications for behavioral disturbances associated with TBI may also be prescribed.
Some of these drugs have significant side effects in persons with TBI and are used only in compelling circumstances.
Individualized therapy is used to manage personality and behavioral changes caused by TBI and to regain social skills.
Vocational training is also common to many rehab programs.
According to a consensus statement on brain injury from the National Institutes of Health, persons with TBI and their families should play an integral role in the planning and design of their individualized rehabilitation programs.
Brain injuries vary widely depending on the area of damage.
A blow to the hippocampus causes memory loss.
A brainstem injury is similar to a high spinal cord injury.
Injury to the basal ganglia affects movement, and damage to the frontal lobe can lead to behavioral changes.
Injury to certain parts of the cortex affects speech and understanding.
Each symptom may require specialized care and treatment.
Like spinal cord injury and stroke, TBI involves many physiological processes, including nerve cell (axon) injury, contusions (bruises), hematomas (clots), and swelling.
A cascade of increasingly severe secondary injuries can occur for days and even weeks after the initial trauma.
Key areas of current TBI research include studying single versus repetitive head injuries and developing treatments that support the brain’s ability to repair itself after injury.
Scientists are also investigating potential medications and interventions that may disrupt or diminish secondary biochemical reactions that cause more damage; several clinical trials have tested the effect of acute hypothermia (cooling) after brain trauma.
Improving diagnosis and assessment of brain injuries is another research priority.
More than half the patients with severe TBI recover previous function or have only moderate disability: outcomes are improved by immediate medical care, including surgery that may relieve pressure in the skull or repair fractures and limit secondary damage.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Brain Injury Resource Center, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Merck Manual, Model Systems Knowledge Translation Center.
Brain Injury Association of America (BIAA) features resources on living with brain injury, treatment, rehabilitation, research, prevention, etc.
It also has state-by-state affiliates. https://www.biausa.org
Traumatic Brain Injury Center of Excellence (TBICoE) serves active-duty military, their dependents and veterans with traumatic brain injury. https://health.mil/Military-Health-Topics/Centers-of-Excellence/Traumatic-Brain-Injury-Center-of-Excellence
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Model Systems of Care are specialty head injury clinics with federal grants for developing and demonstrating expertise with traumatic brain injury.
The centers create and disseminate new knowledge about the course, treatment, and outcomes of these types of injuries, and demonstrate the benefits of a coordinated system of care. https://msktc.org/tbi/model-system-centers
University of Alabama – Birmingham, AL
Indiana University School of Medicine/Rehabilitation Hospital of Indiana - Indianapolis, IN
Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital - Boston, MA
Wayne State University, School of Medicine - Detroit, MI
Kessler Foundation – West Orange, NJ
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai - NY, NY
Rusk Rehabilitation, New York University School of Medicine - NY, NY
Ohio State University - Columbus, OH
Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute - Elkins Park, PA
TIRR Memorial Hermann – Houston, TX
Virginia Commonwealth University – Richmond, VA
University of Washington - Seattle, WA
Cerebral palsy (CP) refers to a group of conditions that affect control of movement and posture.
CP disorders are not caused by problems in the muscles or nerves.
Instead, faulty development or damage to areas in the brain cause inadequate control of movement and posture.
Symptoms range from mild to severe, including forms of paralysis.
Cerebral palsy does not always cause profound disability.
While a child with severe CP might be unable to walk and may require extensive care, a child with mild cerebral palsy might only be slightly off-balance and require no special assistance.
CP is not contagious, nor is it usually inherited.
With treatment, most children significantly improve their abilities.
While symptoms may change over time, cerebral palsy by definition is not progressive; if impairment does increase, it’s usually due to a disease or condition other than CP.
Children with cerebral palsy often require treatment for intellectual and learning disabilities, seizures, and vision, hearing and speech difficulties.
Cerebral palsy is not usually diagnosed until a child is about two to three years old.
It affects about 1.5 to more than 4 children out of 1,000 over the age of three.
Globally, over 17 million people have cerebral palsy.
About 70 to 80 percent of those affected have spastic cerebral palsy, in which muscles are stiff, making movement difficult.
When both legs are affected (spastic diplegia), a child may have difficulty walking because tight muscles in the hips and legs cause the legs to turn inward and scissor at the knees.
In other cases, only one side of the body is affected (spastic hemiplegia), often with the arm more severely affected than the leg.
Most severe is spastic quadriplegia, in which all four limbs and the trunk are affected, often along with the muscles of the mouth and tongue.
About 10 to 20 percent of people with CP have the dyskinetic form, which affects the entire body.
It is characterized by fluctuations in muscle tone from too tight to too loose; dyskinetic CP is sometimes associated with uncontrolled movements (slow and writhing or rapid and jerky).
Children often have trouble learning to control their bodies well enough to sit and walk.
Because muscles of the face and tongue can be affected, swallowing and speech may be difficult.
About 5 to 10 percent of people with CP have the ataxic form, which affects balance and coordination; they may walk with an unsteady gait and have difficulty with motions that require coordination, such as writing.
In the United States, about 10 to 20 percent of children who have CP acquired the disorder after birth, the result of brain damage in the first few months or years of life; brain infections, such as bacterial meningitis or viral encephalitis; or head injury.
Cerebral palsy present at birth may not be detected for months.
In most cases, the cause of congenital cerebral palsy is unknown.
Scientists have pinpointed some specific events during pregnancy or around the time of birth that can damage motor centers in the developing brain.
Until recently, doctors believed that a lack of oxygen during delivery was the primary cause of cerebral palsy.
Studies show that this causes only about 10 percent of cases.
Hyperbaric oxygen continues to be explored for treatment of CP, stroke, or brain injury.
Some clinics and manufacturers promote its use for CP but there is no consensus that it is effective.
A child with CP usually begins physical therapy to increase motor skills (sitting and walking), improve muscle strength, and help prevent contractures (shortening of muscles that limit joint movement).
Sometimes braces, splints, or casts are used to improve function of the hands or legs.
If contractures are severe, surgery may be recommended to lengthen affected muscles.
A newer technique called Constraint-Induced Movement Therapy (CIMT) is a type of physical therapy used successfully with adult stroke survivors with a weak arm on one side of the body.
The therapy restrains the stronger arm in a cast, forcing the weaker arm to perform activities.
In a randomized, controlled study of children with cerebral palsy, one group of children went through conventional physical therapy and another group went through 21 consecutive days of CIMT.
Researchers looked for evidence of improvement in the function of the disabled arm, whether the improvement lasted after the end of treatment, and if it was associated with significant gains in other areas, such as trunk control, mobility, communication, and self-help skills.
Children receiving CIMT outperformed the children receiving conventional physical therapy across all measures, and six months later they still had better control of their arm.
Researchers are developing new ways to target and strengthen spastic muscles.
For example, with functional electrical stimulation (FES), a microscopic wireless device is inserted into specific muscles or nerves and is powered by remote control.
This technique has been used to activate and strengthen muscles in the hand, shoulder, and ankle in people with cerebral palsy, as well as in stroke survivors.
For more information on FES, see pages 128-130.
Drugs may ease spasticity or reduce abnormal movement.
In some cases, a small pump is implanted under the skin to continuously deliver an anti-spasm drug, such as baclofen.
Success has been reported using Botox injections to quiet selective muscles.
For younger children with spasticity affecting both legs, dorsal rhizotomy may permanently reduce spasticity and improve the ability to sit, stand, and walk.
In this procedure, doctors cut some of the nerve fibers that contribute to spasticity.
As a child with CP grows older, therapy and other support services will change.
Physical therapy is supplemented by vocational training, recreation and leisure programs, and special education, when necessary.
Counseling for emotional and psychological challenges such as anxiety and depression is important during adolescence.
United Cerebral Palsy, March of Dimes, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Cerebral Palsy Foundation.
Cerebral Palsy Foundation funds research to discover the cause, cure and care for those with CP and related developmental disabilities. https://www.yourcpf.org
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation features resources and connections to address birth defects, infant mortality, low birth weight and lack of prenatal care. https://www.marchofdimes.org
United Cerebral Palsy (UCP) offers resources on CP health and wellness, plus lifestyle, education and advocacy resources.
UCP advances full inclusion of people with disabilities; two-thirds of people served by UCP have disabilities other than cerebral palsy. https://ucp.org
Friedreich’s ataxia (FA) is an inherited disease that causes progressive damage to the nervous system.
It can result in muscle weakness, speech difficulties, or heart disease.
The first symptom is usually difficulty with walking; this gradually worsens and can spread to the arms and the trunk.
Loss of sensation in the extremities may spread to other parts of the body.
Other features include loss of tendon reflexes, especially in the knees and ankles.
Most people with Friedreich’s ataxia develop scoliosis (a curving of the spine to one side), which may require surgical intervention.
Other symptoms may include chest pain, shortness of breath, and heart palpitations.
These symptoms are the result of various forms of heart disease that often accompany Friedreich’s ataxia, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (enlargement of the heart), myocardial fibrosis (formation of fiber-like material in the muscles of the heart), and cardiac failure.
Friedreich’s ataxia is named after the physician Nicholas Friedreich, who first described the condition in the 1860s.
“Ataxia” refers to coordination problems and unsteadiness and occurs in many diseases and conditions.
Friedreich’s ataxia is marked by degeneration of nerve tissue in the spinal cord and of nerves that control arm and leg movement.
The spinal cord becomes thinner and nerve cells lose some of the myelin insulation that helps them conduct impulses.
Friedreich’s ataxia is rare; it affects about 1 in 50,000 people in the U.S. Males and females are affected equally.
Symptoms usually begin between the ages of five and fifteen, but can appear as early as eighteen months or as late as thirty.
There is currently no cure for Friedreich’s ataxia but its first treatment was approved by the FDA in 2023: Skyclarys, manufactured by Reata Pharmaceuticals, is a once-a-day oral pill meant to boost neurological function and slow disease progression.
Some symptoms and accompanying complications of Friedreich’s ataxia, including scoliosis, heart disease, and diabetes, can be separately treated with surgery or medication.
Physical therapy may also help prolong the use of arms and legs, while speech therapy can help manage swallowing and speech issues.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Organization for Rare Disorders, Friedreich’s Ataxia Research Alliance, Muscular Dystrophy Association
Friedreich’s Ataxia Research Alliance (FARA) offers information on Friedreich’s ataxia and the related ataxias, including current research, as well as information for researchers, patients, families and caregivers.
FARA also offers support and information for the newly diagnosed. https://www.curefa.org
Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) offers news and information about neuromuscular diseases, including ataxias. https://www.mda.org
National Ataxia Foundation (NAF) supports research into hereditary ataxia, with numerous affiliated chapters and support groups in the United States and Canada. https://www.ataxia.org
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) is committed to the identification and treatment of more than 6,000 rare disorders, including Friedreich’s ataxia, through education, advocacy, research and service. https://rarediseases.org
Guillain-Barré (ghee-yan bah-ray) syndrome is a disorder in which the body’s immune system attacks part of the peripheral nervous system.
The first symptoms include varying degrees of weakness or tingling sensations in the legs, often spreading to the arms and upper body; these can increase in intensity until a person is totally paralyzed.
Many people require intensive care during the early course of their illness, especially if a ventilator is required.
It usually occurs a few days or weeks after a person has had symptoms of a respiratory or gastrointestinal viral infection; while the most common related infection is bacterial, 60 percent of cases do not have a known cause.
Some cases may be triggered by the influenza virus or by an immune reaction to the influenza virus.
In very rare cases, surgery or vaccinations may trigger it.
The disorder can develop over the course of hours or days, or it may take three to four weeks.
It is not known why Guillain-Barré strikes some people and not others.
Most people recover from even the most severe cases of Guillain-Barré, although some continue to have a degree of weakness.
There is no known cure for this syndrome, but therapies can reduce its severity and accelerate recovery.
There are a number of ways to treat the complications.
Plasmapheresis (also known as plasma exchange) mechanically removes autoantibodies from the bloodstream.
High-dose immunoglobulin therapy is also used to boost the immune system.
Researchers hope to understand the workings of the immune system to identify which cells are responsible for carrying out the attack on the nervous system.
According to the CDC, “Current research suggests that Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), an uncommon sickness of the nervous system, is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS.”
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
GBS/CIDP Foundation International offers information on Guillain-Barré and Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy. https://www.gbs-cidp.org
The leukodystrophies are progressive, hereditary disorders that affect the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves.
Specific leukodystrophies include metachromatic leukodystrophy, Krabbe disease, adrenoleukodystrophy, Canavan disease, Alexander disease, Zellweger syndrome, Refsum disease, and cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease can also lead to paralysis.
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) affected the young boy Lorenzo Odone, whose story is told in the 1992 film “Lorenzo’s Oil.”
In this disease, the fatty covering (myelin sheath) on nerve fibers in the brain is lost, and the adrenal gland degenerates, leading to progressive neurological disability.
United Leukodystrophy Foundation (ULF) raises funds, offers resources and clinical detail on the leukodystrophies. https://ulf.org
Lyme disease is a bacterial (Borrelia burgdorferi) infection transmitted to humans by the bite of certain black-legged ticks, although fewer than 50 percent of all Lyme disease patients recall being bit.
Typical symptoms include fever, headache, and fatigue.
Lyme disease, which can lead to neurological symptoms including loss of function in arms and legs, is often misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or multiple sclerosis.
According to some Lyme disease experts, standard diagnostic methods fail to discover as many as 40 percent of cases in the early stages of infection.
Most cases of Lyme disease can be treated successfully with antibiotics over several weeks.
While some people with long-term Lyme disease take antibiotics over an extended course of time, most physicians do not consider Lyme to be a chronic infection.
According to published medical literature, many patients diagnosed as having chronic Lyme disease demonstrate no evidence of prior infection; only 37 percent of patients in one referral center had current or previous infection with B. burgdorferi as the explanation for their symptoms.
There are reports that hyperbaric oxygen and bee venom have been effective for some in treating symptoms of the disease.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases is currently funding research to better understand the long term effects of the disease.
American Lyme Disease Foundation offers resources and treatment information. https://aldf.com
International Lyme and Associated Diseases Society offers educational materials. https://www.ilads.org
Lyme Disease Association offers information and referral services. https://lymediseaseassociation.org
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic and often disabling disease of the central nervous system.
A study funded by the National MS Society has confirmed that nearly 1 million people are living with MS in the United States.
Symptoms may be episodic and mild, such as numbness in a limb, or severe, including paralysis, cognitive loss, or loss of vision.
MS involves decreased nerve function associated with scar formation on myelin, the covering of nerve cells.
Repeated episodes of inflammation destroy myelin, leaving multiple areas of scar tissue (sclerosis) along the covering of the nerve cells.
This results in slowing or blockage of nerve impulse transmission in that area.
Multiple sclerosis often progresses with episodes (called “exacerbations”) that last days, weeks, or months.
Exacerbations may alternate with times of reduced or no symptoms (remission).
Symptoms of MS include weakness, tremor, or paralysis of one or more extremities; spasticity (uncontrollable spasms); movement problems; numbness; tingling; pain; loss of vision; loss of coordination and balance; incontinence; loss of memory or judgment; and, most commonly, fatigue.
Fatigue, occurring in about 80 percent of people with MS, can significantly interfere with a person’s ability to work and function.
It may be the most prominent symptom in a person who has otherwise been minimally affected by the disease.
MS-related fatigue generally occurs on a daily basis and tends to worsen as the day progresses.
It tends to be aggravated by heat and humidity.
MS-related fatigue does not appear to be correlated with depression or the degree of physical impairment.
Multiple sclerosis varies greatly from person to person and in the severity and course of the disease.
A relapsing-remitting course, the most common form of MS, is characterized by partial or total recovery after attacks; about 75 percent of people with MS begin with a relapsing-remitting course.
Relapsing-remitting MS may become steadily progressive.
Attacks and partial recoveries may continue to occur.
Of those who start with relapsing-remitting, more than half will develop secondary-progressive MS within ten years; 90 percent within 25 years.
A progressive course from onset of the disease is called primary-progressive MS.
In this case, symptoms generally do not remit.
The exact cause of MS is unknown.
Studies indicate an environmental factor may be involved.
There is a higher incidence in northern Europe, northern United States, southern Australia, and New Zealand than in other areas of the world.
Because people in sunnier climates are less likely to get MS, research has targeted vitamin D levels; indeed, there is some link between lower levels of vitamin D and MS.
Vitamin D is synthesized naturally by the skin as it is exposed to sunlight.
Studies show that people in northern climates often have reduced vitamin D levels; babies born in less sunny April have the highest risk of developing multiple sclerosis later in life while those born in sunnier October have the lowest risk.
There may also be a familial tendency toward the disorder.
Most people with MS are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 40.
Women are more commonly affected than men.
The progress, severity, and symptoms of MS in any individual cannot yet be predicted.
Multiple sclerosis is believed to be an abnormal immune response directed against the central nervous system (CNS).
The cells and proteins of the body’s immune system, which normally defend the body against infections, leave the blood vessels serving the CNS and turn against the brain and spinal cord, destroying myelin.
The specific triggering mechanism that causes the immune system to attack its own myelin remains unknown, although a viral infection combined with an inherited genetic susceptibility is a leading suspect.
While many different viruses have been thought to cause MS, there has been no definitive evidence linking its cause to any one virus.
Multiple sclerosis was among the first diseases to be described scientifically.
Nineteenth-century doctors did not fully understand what they were chronicling, but drawings from autopsies done as early as 1838 clearly show what is known today as MS.
In 1868, Jean-Martin Charcot, a neurologist at the University of Paris, carefully examined a young woman with a tremor of a sort he had never seen before.
He noted her other neurological problems, including slurred speech and abnormal eye movements, and compared them to other patients he had seen.
When she died, he examined her brain and found the characteristic scars or “plaques” of MS.
Dr. Charcot wrote a complete description of the disease and the changes in the brain that accompany it.
He was baffled by its cause and frustrated by its resistance to all of his treatments, including electrical stimulation and strychnine (a nerve stimulant and poison).
He also tried injections of gold and silver (somewhat helpful in the treatment of the other major nerve disorder common at that time, syphilis).
One century later, in 1969, the first successful scientific clinical trial was completed for a treatment of MS.
A group of patients who were having multiple sclerosis exacerbations were given a steroid drug; steroids remain in use today for acute exacerbations.
Clinical trials since then have led to the approvals of more than a dozen medications shown to affect immune response, and thus the course of MS.
Betaseron, which helps reduce the severity and frequency of attacks; Avonex, approved in 1996, known to slow the development of disability and reduce the severity and frequency of attacks, Copaxone, which treats relapsing-remitting MS; Rebif, for reducing the number and frequency of relapses and slowing the progression of disability; and Plegridy, approved for the treatment of relapsing forms of MS and administered in less frequent doses.
Novantrone treats advanced or chronic MS and reduces the number of relapses.
Tysabri is a monoclonal antibody administered by infusion and approved to treat relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
The drug hampers the movement of potentially damaging immune cells from the bloodstream, across the blood-brain barrier, and into the brain and spinal cord.
FDA prescribing information about Tysabri includes a “black box” warning about the risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), an infection of the brain that usually leads to death or severe disability.
Known factors that increase the risk of PML in Tysabri-treated patients are previous treatment with an immunosuppressant and the length of time Tysabri is taken.
Other intravenous infusions approved to treat MS include Ocrevus, shown to reduce relapse rates and slow disability progression in relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis and primary progressive multiple sclerosis, and Novantrone, which reduces neurologic disability and frequency of clinical relapses in secondary progressive MS, progressive-relapsing MS and worsening relapsing-remitting MS.
Lemtrada, shown to reduce relapses, is prescribed only when other treatments have proven unsuccessful; a “black box” warning reports that the medication can cause serious or fatal autoimmune conditions and life-threatening infusion reactions and that strokes have occurred within three days of receiving the treatment.
Oral medications approved for treating MS include:
Gilenya, for reducing the frequency of relapses and delaying physical disability in relapsing forms of MS; Aubagio, which inhibits the function of specific immune cells implicated in MS; Tecfidera, shown to reduce relapses and development of brain lesions and to slow disability progression over time; Vumerity, similar to Tecfidera but with fewer reported gastrointestinal side effects, treats relapsing forms of MS by reducing relapses and slowing progression of disability; and Mayzent, shown to reduce relapses and slow progression of disability for relapsing forms of MS.
Mavenclad, which decreases relapses and reduces progression of disability in relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis carries a “black box” warning for increased risk of malignancy and fetal harm, and is recommended only for patients who have had an inadequate response to an alternative drug.
Ampyra, an extended release form of 4 aminopyridine, is approved to improve walking speed in people with MS.
This oral medication is available by prescription from compounding pharmacies.
There are many research efforts underway to treat MS:
Antibiotics that fight infection may decrease MS disease activity.
Various infectious agents have been proposed as potential causes for MS, including Epstein-Barr virus, herpes virus, and coronaviruses.
Minocycline (an antibiotic) has showed promising results as an anti-inflammatory agent in trials with relapsing-remitting MS.
Plasmapheresis is a procedure in which a person’s blood is removed to separate plasma from other blood substances that may contain antibodies and other immune-sensitive products.
The purified plasma is then transfused back into the patient.
Plasmapheresis is used to treat myasthenia gravis, Guillain-Barré, and other demyelinating diseases.
Studies of plasmapheresis in people with primary and secondary progressive MS have had mixed results.
Bone marrow transplantation is being studied in MS.
By wiping out the immune cells in a patient’s bone marrow with chemotherapy and then repopulating it with healthy mesenchymal stem cells, researchers hope the rebuilt immune system will stop attacking its own nerves.
Studies and trials exploring the effectiveness of treating MS using other types of stem cells, including embryonic stem cells, olfactory ensheathing glia and umbilical cord blood stem cells, are currently underway.
A number of clinics outside the United States offer treatments with various cell lines; no data exists to evaluate these clinics and they should be approached with caution.
Therapies to repair damage to myelin coating on nerve fibers, which can lead to disrupted nerve signaling and nerve loss, are also being studied in several clinical trials.
Medicines commonly used for MS symptoms include baclofen, tizanidine, or diazepam, often used to reduce muscle spasticity.
Doctors prescribe anti-cholinergic medications to reduce urinary problems and antidepressants to improve mood or behavior symptoms.
Amantadine (an antiviral drug) is sometimes used to treat fatigue.
To stay current on MS drug information, visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society’s webpage (https://www.nationalmssociety.org/Treating-MS/Medications) which provides an overview of drugs used to modify the disease, manage symptoms and manage relapse.
Physical therapy, speech therapy, or occupational therapy may improve a person’s outlook, reduce depression, maximize function, and improve coping skills.
Exercise can help maintain muscle tone and bone density and may also improve energy level, bowel and bladder function, mood, and flexibility.
MS is chronic, unpredictable, and at this time incurable, but life expectancy can be normal or nearly so.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Multiple Sclerosis Society, Consortium of MS Centers, Multiple Sclerosis Complementary and Alternative Medicine/Rocky Mountain MS Center
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis Centers offers a repository of clinical and research information for people with MS.
Publishes the International Journal of MS Care. https://www.mscare.org
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America features free services and programs including a helpline with trained specialists; educational videos and publications, including MSAA’s magazine, The Motivator; safety and mobility equipment distribution; cooling accessories for heat-sensitive individuals; educational programs held across the country; and a lending library. https://mymsaa.org
Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada has information about the disease, progress in MS research and services as well as details about fundraising events, and donation opportunities. https://mssociety.ca
National Multiple Sclerosis Society provides information on living with MS, treatment, scientific progress, MS specialty centers, clinical research funding, local chapters, and resources for healthcare professionals. https://www.nationalmssociety.org
The Rocky Mountain MS Center provides information and discussion of complementary and alternative medicine therapies used by people living with MS, such as acupuncture, herbal medicine, and homeopathy. https://mscenter.org/treating-ms/complementary-care
Neurofibromatosis (NF) is a genetic, progressive and unpredictable disorder of the nervous system which causes tumors to form on the nerves anywhere in the body at any time.
Although most NF-related tumors are not cancerous, they may cause problems by compressing the spinal cord and surrounding nerves; this can lead to paralysis.
The most common tumors are neurofibromas, which develop in the tissue surrounding peripheral nerves.
There are three types of neurofibromatosis.
Type 1 causes skin changes and deformed bones, can affect the spinal cord and brain, often contributes to learning disabilities, and usually starts at birth.
Type 2 causes hearing loss, ringing in the ears, and poor balance; it often starts in the teen years.
Schwannomatosis, the rarest form, causes intense pain.
As a group, the neurofibromatoses affect more than 100,000 Americans.
There is no known cure for any form of NF, although the genes for both NF-1 and NF-2 have been identified.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Neurofibromatosis Network
Children’s Tumor Foundation supports research and the development of treatments for neurofibromatosis, provides information, and helps in the development of clinical centers, best practices, and patient support mechanisms. https://www.ctf.org
Neurofibromatosis Inc. California offers medical symposiums, family support and patient advocacy, and supports NF research. http://www.nfcalifornia.org
Neurofibromatosis Network advocates for NF research, disseminates medical and scientific information about NF, offers a national referral database for clinical care, and promotes awareness of NF. https://www.nfnetwork.org
Poliomyelitis is a disease caused by a virus that attacks nerves that control motor function.
Polio (infantile paralysis) has nearly been eradicated from almost every country in the world since the approval of the Salk (1955) and Sabin (1962) vaccines.
In 2023, only two countries (Afghanistan and Pakistan) remained polio-endemic, down from more than 125 in 1988.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 12 million people worldwide live with some degree of disability caused by poliomyelitis.
The last major outbreaks of polio in the United States were in the early 1950s.
For years, most polio survivors lived active lives, their memory of polio mainly forgotten and their health status stable.
But by the late 1970s, survivors who were 20 or more years past their diagnosis began noting new problems, including fatigue, pain, breathing or swallowing problems, and additional weakness—medical professionals called this post-polio syndrome (PPS).
Some people experience PPS-related fatigue as a flu-like exhaustion that worsens as the day progresses.
This type of fatigue can also increase during physical activity, and it may cause difficulty with concentration and memory.
Others experience muscle weakness that increases with exercise and improves with rest.
Research indicates that the time one has lived with the residuals of polio is as much of a risk factor as age.
It also appears that individuals who experienced the most severe original paralysis with the greatest functional recovery have more problems with PPS than others with less severe original involvement.
Post-polio syndrome appears to be related to physical overuse and, perhaps, nerve stress.
When the poliovirus destroyed or injured motor neurons, muscle fibers were orphaned and paralysis resulted.
Polio survivors who regained movement did so because non-affected neighboring nerve cells began to “sprout” and reconnect to what might be considered orphaned muscles.
Survivors who have lived for years with this restructured neuromuscular system are now experiencing the consequences including overworked surviving nerve cells, muscles, and joints, compounded by the effects of growing older.
There is no conclusive evidence to support the idea that post-polio syndrome is a reinfection of the poliovirus.
Polio survivors are urged to take care of their health in all the usual ways—by seeking periodic medical attention, being nutrition-wise, avoiding excessive weight gain, and by stopping smoking or overindulging in alcohol.
Survivors are advised to listen to their body’s warning signals, avoid activities that cause pain, prevent overuse of muscles, and conserve energy by avoiding tasks that are nonessential, and by using adaptive equipment when needed.
Post-polio syndrome is not typically a life-threatening condition, but it may cause significant discomfort and disability.
The most common disability caused by PPS is deterioration of mobility.
People with PPS may also experience difficulties performing daily activities such as cooking, cleaning, shopping, and driving.
Energy-conserving assistive devices such as canes, crutches, walkers, wheelchairs, or electric scooters may be necessary for some people.
Living with post-polio syndrome often means adjusting to new disabilities; for some, reliving childhood experiences of coming to terms with polio can be difficult.
For example, moving from a manual to a power chair can be tough.
Fortunately, PPS is gaining increasing attention in the medical community, and there are many professionals who understand it and can provide appropriate medical and psychological help.
In addition, there are PPS support groups, newsletters, and educational networks that provide up-to-date information about PPS while assuring survivors that they are not alone in their struggle.
International Polio Network, Montreal Neurological Hospital Post-Polio Clinic
Global Polio Eradication Initiative is a public-private partnership led by national governments and spearheaded by the World Health Organization (WHO), Rotary International, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). https://polioeradication.org
Post-Polio Health International offers information for polio survivors and promotes networking among the post-polio community.
PPHI publishes numerous resources, including the quarterly Polio Network News, the annual Post-Polio Directory, and The Handbook on the Late Effects of Poliomyelitis for Physicians and Survivors. https://post-polio.org
Spina bifida is the most common permanently-disabling birth defect in the United States.
One out of 1,500 newborns in the United States is born with spina bifida.
About 166,000 people are currently living with spina bifida.
A large percent of babies with spina bifida are born to parents with no family history of this birth defect.
While spina bifida appears to run in certain families, it does not follow any particular pattern of inheritance.
Spina bifida, a type of neural tube defect (NTD), means “cleft spine,” or an incomplete closure of the spinal column.
This birth defect occurs between the fourth and sixth weeks of pregnancy when the embryo is less than an inch long.
Normally, a groove along the middle of the back of the embryo deepens, allowing the sides to meet and enclosing the tissue destined to be the spinal cord in a tube-like structure.
In spina bifida, the sides of the embryo do not fully meet, resulting in defects in the future spinal column.
These openings allow the spinal cord and nerves to be exposed to amniotic fluid and can be traumatized just by the baby moving around.
These “lesions” often have functional consequences on movement and sensation.
The most serious form of spina bifida may include muscle weakness or paralysis below the level of lesion of the spinal column along with loss of sensation and loss of bowel and bladder control.
There are three general types of spina bifida (listed below from mild to severe).
This form of spina bifida occurs when one or more of the bones of the spine incompletely fuse or close which results in a small gap.
The spinal cord is usually intact and there is no nerve or spinal cord damage.
It is fairly common and found incidentally in around 12 percent of the population in the United States.
People with this defect have intact skin and rarely have any symptoms.
The meninges, or the protective covering around the spinal cord, pushes out through the opening in the vertebrae in a sac called the meningocele.
The spinal cord does not protrude into this sac and remains intact; this can be repaired with little or no damage to the nerve pathways.
People with this defect rarely have symptoms.
This is the most severe form of spina bifida, in which a portion of the meninges, spinal cord and nerves protrudes through the back defect.
Because the spinal cord and nerves are not protected, they can be damaged which results in muscle and sensation problems.
Often associated with myelomeningocele is hydrocephalus, an accumulation of fluid in the brain that can cause swelling of the ventricles and damaging pressure on the brain.
A large percentage of children born with myelomeningocele has hydrocephalus.
Increased pressure within the brain can be controlled by surgical procedures such as the more common shunting procedure.
This relieves the fluid build-up in the brain and reduces the risk of damage, seizures, or blindness.
In some cases, children with spina bifida who also have a history of hydrocephalus experience learning problems.
They may have difficulty paying attention, problem solving and grasping reading and math.
Early intervention with children who experience learning problems can help considerably to prepare them for school and life.
Spina bifida not only has an impact on the nervous system but can cause problems in multiple body systems.
Examples of these secondary conditions may include musculoskeletal problems, impaired bladder and bowel control, kidney failure, latex allergy, obesity, skin breakdown, and gastrointestinal disorders.
In addition, learning disabilities and psychosocial issues such as anxiety, depression and sexual problems can occur.
Spina bifida impacts muscle movement and sensation to varying degrees depending on which part of the spinal cord is involved.
Mobility needs will depend on what muscles are weak or paralyzed.
Some children may not require assistive devices whereas others may need braces, crutches or wheelchairs to get around home and in the community.
Also, many children can independently manage their bowel and bladder programs.
According to the Spina Bifida Association (SBA), medical consensus indicates that, besides physical issues, it is equally important that attention be focused on the psychosocial development of children and young adults.
Recent surveys of adults with spina bifida conducted by SBA indicate that emotional problems can result from factors such as low self-esteem and lack of social skills training.
Children with spina bifida are at risk for developing a tethered spinal cord where the spinal cord and the membranes that line it stick to local scar tissue.
This typically occurs because of the initial back closure surgery.
Tethering puts tension on the cord which may negatively impact spinal cord function.
Tethered cord can occur throughout life, but it typically happens during periods of rapid growth.
Spina bifida is a relatively common birth defect, however until recent decades children born with a myelomeningocele died shortly after birth.
What made the difference was the ability to surgically close the open spinal defect and use shunts to drain off spinal fluid that would cause hydrocephalus.
These procedures are usually done within the first 24 hours after birth.
With recent medical advances most of these infants typically go on to live full and active lives as adults.
Birth defects can happen in any family.
Women with certain chronic health problems, including diabetes and seizure disorders needing treatment with anticonvulsants, have an increased risk (approximately 1 out of 100) of having a baby with spina bifida.
Many things can affect a pregnancy, including family genes and things women may be exposed to during pregnancy.
Recent studies have shown that folic acid is one factor that may reduce the risk of having a baby with an NTD.
Taking folic acid before and during early pregnancy reduces the risk of spina bifida and other NTDs.
Folic acid, a common water-soluble B vitamin, is essential for the functioning of the human body.
During periods of rapid growth, such as fetal development, the body’s requirement for this vitamin increases.
The average diet in the United States does not supply the recommended level of folic acid; it can be found in multivitamins, fortified breakfast cereals, dark green leafy vegetables such as broccoli and spinach, egg yolks, and some fruits and fruit juices.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), folic acid fortification of enriched grain products is an important way to help prevent NTDs.
The CDC reports that researchers who used data from birth defects tracking systems found that ever since enriched grain products have been fortified with folic acid, about 1,300 babies are born each year without an NTD who might have otherwise been affected.
Additionally, the CDC urges all women who are capable of becoming pregnant to get at least 400 mcg of folic acid every day.
It is especially important for women to get this amount of folic acid at least one month before becoming pregnant to help prevent NTDs.
Women can get folic acid in these ways:
Take a vitamin containing 400 mcg of folic acid every day.
Eat a bowl of breakfast cereal every day that has 100 percent of the daily value of folic acid.
Eat a diet with plenty of fortified grains and foods like beans, peas, and leafy greens, which are rich in folate, the natural form of folic acid in foods.
Folic acid supplementation must begin before conception, as the condition develops before women know they are pregnant.
It is important to identify early in the pregnancy whether there is an NTD/spina bifida.
Three prenatal tests are used to detect spina bifida: blood test for alpha-fetoprotein; ultrasound; and amniocentesis.
Early identification allows families to explore options for prenatal surgery and delivery.
Researchers are looking for the genes linked specifically to spina bifida.
They are also exploring the complex mechanisms of normal brain development to see how neural tube problems impact brain development.
This will provide information that can influence how future clinical care and interventions can positively impact individuals with spina bifida.
Historically, treatment for spina bifida has only been to provide care after the baby is born.
Since the 1930s, surgical closure of the back was performed within a few days of birth.
Such interventions prevent further damage to the nervous tissue, but do not restore function to the already damaged nerves.
A national research study compared two spine closure surgery methods for babies with spina bifida:
1) during pregnancy, also known as fetal surgery, and 2) standard surgeries performed after birth.
Babies who had fetal surgery required less shunting for hydrocephalus and seemed to have improved mobility.
Now, recipients of fetal surgeries are being followed to discover the long-term benefits of prenatal surgery.
Spina bifida is a common birth defect that can have many physical, emotional and psychosocial consequences.
Nevertheless, most people with spina bifida who have the appropriate supports will live full and active lives, and there is ongoing and promising research about ways to improve their quality of life.
Spina Bifida Association, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation offers information about the four major problems that threaten the health of America’s babies: birth defects, infant mortality, low birth weight, and lack of prenatal care. https://www.marchofdimes.org
Spina Bifida Association builds a better and brighter future for those impacted by spina bifida. https://www.spinabifidaassociation.org
The spinal cord is a critical communication center that links the body and brain, coordinating movement, relaying sensory information, and regulating major functions including bowel and bladder, digestion, and heart rate.
An injured cord loses the ability to send and receive messages from the brain, causing a temporary or permanent loss of function and paralysis at the level of injury.
Spinal cord injuries occur in two phases.
The initial trauma to the cord damages or destroys spinal nerve cells.
But in the hours and days after injury a cascade of secondary events, including loss of oxygen and the release of toxic chemicals at the site of injury, further damage the cord.
The most common cause of spinal cord injury is trauma caused by car accidents and falls, but it may also stem from diseases acquired at birth (such as spina bifida or spinal muscular atrophy) or that develop later in life (such as cancer or viral illnesses that cause inflammation in the cord).
Injuries that damage only part of the cord are classified as incomplete because they leave some level of sensory and motor function intact.
Complete injuries affect an entire spinal cord segment, resulting in permanent functional loss at the area of injury.
Generally speaking, most people show some functional improvement after an injury.
With many injuries, especially incomplete injuries, a person may recover additional function eighteen months or more after the injury.
In some cases, people with SCI regain some function years after the injury.
The spinal cord is a bundle of nerves that begin at the base of the skull and descends roughly 18 inches down the back through a hollow opening in the spine known as the spinal canal.
The small, stacked bones (vertebrae) that comprise the spine not only act as a structural support for the body, but also protect the cord and its crucial role in communication.
Intervertebral disks between the vertebrae absorb shocks and prevent the bones from rubbing together.
Any of these bones may be broken without causing a spinal cord injury if the cord itself remains undamaged.
Conversely, a spinal cord injury may occur absent broken bones, caused instead by bruising or compression of the cord.
Nerves inside the spinal cord carrying messages from the brain exit the spine through nerve roots between each vertebra.
Damaged nerve fibers branching off these vertebrae can impair function related to muscles and nerves throughout the body.
These long nerve fibers (axons) are covered by myelin, a type of electrical insulation substance.
Loss of myelin, which can occur with cord trauma and is the hallmark of such diseases as multiple sclerosis, prevents effective transmission of nerve signals.
One of the main challenges in successfully treating spinal cord injury stems from the fact that nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord are not able to regenerate; researchers continue to seek innovative ways to repair and regrow these cells after injury.
To understand the potential effects of a spinal cord injury, it helps to visualize the thirty-three vertebrae that comprise the backbone.
Nerves from each segment are responsible for motor and sensory functions for specific regions of the body.
The location of a spinal cord injury determines what part of the body and functions are affected.
In general, the higher up the spinal column an injury occurs, the greater the loss of function.
The segments in the neck, or cervical region, referred to as C1 through C8, control signals to the neck, arms, hands, and, in some cases the diaphragm.
Injuries to this area result in tetraplegia or, as it is more commonly called, quadriplegia.
Injury above the C3 level may impair breathing ability and require the use of a ventilator.
Injury above the C4 level usually means loss of movement and sensation in all four limbs, although often shoulder and neck movement is available to facilitate sip-and-puff devices for mobility, environmental control, and communication.
C5 injuries often retain control of shoulder and biceps, but less control of the wrist or hand.
People with C5 injuries can usually feed themselves and independently handle many activities of daily living.
C6 injuries generally allow enough wrist control to be able to drive adaptive vehicles and handle personal hygiene, but those at this level often lack fine hand function.
Individuals with C7 and T1 injuries can straighten their arms and can typically handle most self-care activities, though dexterity in hands and fingers is more limited.
Nerves in the thoracic, or upper back region (T1 through T12), relay signals to the torso and some parts of the arms.
Injuries from T1 to T8 usually affect control of the upper torso, limiting trunk movement as the result of a lack of abdominal muscle control.
Lower thoracic injuries (T9 to T12) allow good trunk control and good abdominal muscle control.
Those injured in the lumbar, or mid-back region just below the ribs (L1 through L5), are able to control signals to the hips and legs.
A person with an L4 injury can often extend the knees.
The sacral segments (S1 through S5) lie just below the lumbar segments in the mid-back and control signals to the groin, toes, and some parts of the legs.
Besides a loss of sensation or motor function, spinal cord injuries lead to other challenges, including loss of bowel, bladder, and sexual function, low blood pressure, autonomic dysreflexia (for injuries above T6), immune dysfunction, deep vein thrombosis, spasticity, and chronic pain.
Other secondary issues related to injury include bone density loss, pressure injuries, respiratory complications, urinary tract infections, pain, obesity, and depression.
See pages 74-108 for more on these conditions; they are mainly preventable with good healthcare, diet, and physical activity.
Studies on aging with a disability indicate that respiratory illnesses, diabetes, and thyroid disease, occur at a higher rate in people living with both quadriplegia and paraplegia than in the general population
The impact of these debilitating conditions can ripple widely across a life, resulting in lost productivity, increased healthcare costs, and a higher risk of early death.
Spinal cord injuries are most commonly caused by motor vehicle accidents and falls, followed by acts of violence and sports-related injuries (more common in children and teenagers).
According to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center, the average age at injury has increased from 29 years old during the 1970s to 43 since 2015.
About four out of five people with spinal cord injuries are male.
More than half of spinal cord injuries occur in the cervical area, a third occur in the thoracic area, and the remainder occur mostly in the lumbar region.
There are no definitive treatments yet for spinal cord injury.
However, ongoing research to test new therapies is progressing rapidly.
Conventional drugs and those made from living cells that may limit injury progression, decompression surgery, nerve cell transplantation, therapies targeting neural regeneration, plasticity, remyelination, and neuromodulation are being examined as potential ways to minimize the effects of spinal cord injury and restore function.
The biology of the injured spinal cord is enormously complex but clinical trials are underway with more on the horizon.
Here is an overview of the work being done in several research areas.
Researchers are currently investigating a variety of strategies that will prevent the wave of cell death and injury progression that occurs during the secondary phase of spinal cord injury.
Early decompression surgery, performed to relieve pressure within the spinal column, is being studied to determine its impact on neurological recovery; data indicates improved outcomes if surgery is performed within 24 hours after injury.
The steroid drug methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPSS) is sometimes prescribed as an acute treatment in hopes of improving motor and sensory outcomes; its usage has long been debated by clinicians because of concerns about effectiveness and potential complications.
Clinical guidelines developed in 2017 with the support of AO Spine North America, AO Spine International, the American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons suggest that a 24-hour infusion of high dose MPSS be offered to adult patients who present within eight hours of acute spinal cord injury, but not beyond this window due to a lack of demonstrated efficacy; the guidelines suggest a shared decision-making approach with physicians explaining the risks and benefits of MPSS to patients.
The cooling of the spinal cord is another possible acute therapy; hypothermia appears to not only reduce bleeding but also limit cell loss.
Ongoing research studies are being conducted to determine optimal cooling conditions and effectiveness.
Bridging and building a growth friendly environment:
The initial trauma of spinal cord injury triggers a biochemical response from the body that causes a secondary wave of damage.
A scar forming around the injury blocks nerve fibers (axons) that carry messages to and from the brain from crossing through the site.
At the same time, a surge of proteins to the area creates an environment that resists new cell growth.
Scientists are researching how cell-based therapies and tissue engineering can be used to build a bridge over the scar to restore communication and promote neural growth.
Drugs that can counter the growth inhibitors that develop after injury are also being studied.
By making the spinal cord more amenable to new cell growth, any remaining nerve fibers undamaged by injury can more easily strengthen existing connections and make new ones.
This is often referred to as plasticity, or the ability of the nervous system to change its structure.
Damaged axons – the nerve pathways that carry messages up and down the spinal cord – interrupt the brain’s communication with the cord, resulting in lost function at the area of injury.
The term regeneration, broadly speaking, refers to the ability of damaged or severed axons to regrow; restoring a significant degree of sensation and motor control after spinal cord injury depends on rebuilding these broken information highways.
Scientists are currently studying potential treatments that facilitate axon regrowth and circuit reorganization, including gene therapy, tissue engineering, and cell therapy.
Many researchers are also exploring chemicals that facilitate or guide growth and encourage severed axons to make new connections around or through the injury site.
Scientists are investigating the potential of stem cell therapy to treat paralysis by forming new spinal cord relay circuits and replacing lost myelin (a type of electrical insulation substance that covers axons) to restore effective transmission of nerve signals.
Current studies are focused on the potential of various types of cells (including bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, neural stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cells, and non-stem cells such as olfactory ensheathing cells and Schwann cells) to promote connectivity and create a more conducive environment for repair after injury.
In addition, exosomes – tiny structures formed within a cell that are able to transfer proteins, DNA and RNA into other cells – are being studied for their ability to foster functional recovery.
While stem cell research is an active field, critical questions remain about lasting functional recovery, safety, growth conditions, scalability, and delivery.
To date, the Food and Drug Administration has only approved stem cell treatments for certain cancers and blood and immune disorders.
There are no exosome products approved for any treatments.
While stem cell therapy may eventually yield gains for individuals living with paralysis, there is still much research to be done regarding safety and long-term effectiveness.
The FDA cautions patients against seeking unproven and potentially harmful treatment from rogue stem-cell clinics that operate within the U.S. and around the world.
Before enrolling in any scientific study of stem cells, confirm that it has an Investigational New Drug Application (IND) number issued by the FDA.
When in doubt, discuss with your personal healthcare provider before agreeing to participate.
Research conducted over the past few decades increasingly demonstrates the importance of physical rehabilitation on improving function and quality of life after a spinal cord injury.
Intensive, activity-based training, including robotic and body-weight support treadmill training, and overground and standing training can help reorganize and reactivate dormant nerve circuits, leading to gains in mobility and autonomic function.
Scientists continue to study how physiological changes in the nervous system are fostered by high-intensity training in comparison with standard rehabilitation programs.
Studies have found that stepping during treadmill training triggers sensory information that helps reinforce the circuits necessary for stepping.
Scientists use the term plasticity to describe this reinforcement; the nervous system is not “hard wired” and appears to have the ability to change and adapt in response to new stimulation.
Researchers are still learning about the exact role of sensory information in increasing the ability of the spinal cord to learn (or relearn) new tasks, but it is well-established that exercise and physical activity are an essential component of recovery.
The amount and intensity of activity-based training seems to play a significant role in the amount of functional gains an individual experiences.
Activity-based training in combination with advanced therapeutic technologies such as electrical stimulation (see section below) has become a central focus and source of excitement in current spinal cord injury research.
The use of electrical stimulation to restore function is a potentially crucial component of future treatments for paralysis.
The purpose of electrical stimulation deployed through electrodes placed on the skin’s surface or through surgical implantation over the spinal cord — is to replicate signals sent by the brain along the spinal cord prior to injury; in this treatment, electrical pulses activate neural circuits and cause muscle contraction.
Scientists don’t fully understand the mechanisms by which it works, but the current hypothesis is that the stimulation excites the networks in the spinal cord and increases the functional output of the few spared connections from the brain.
Various forms of electrical stimulation are at the forefront of current research across the U.S., including epidural electrical stimulation, transcutaneous stimulation, and magnetic stimulation; each method carries its own advantages and limitations.
Overall, the use of electrical stimulation (on its own and in combination with activity-based training) has yielded multiple gains in mobility, cardiovascular and respiratory function, and bladder and sexual function for individuals with chronic injury.
Non-invasive transcutaneous stimulation (or stimulation through the skin) has also been shown to promote functional recovery in humans with SCI.
Depending on the specific parameters of stimulation therapies (including frequency, intensity, and location), studies have shown improvement in voluntary movement, muscle strength, spasticity, pain, and bladder control in individuals with SCI.
In recent years, clinical and preclinical researchers have explored acute intermittent hypoxia (AIH) as a way to jumpstart plasticity in the spinal cord.
During this therapy, a person briefly breathes in low oxygen air followed by normal oxygen air for several cycles.
Sometimes studied in conjunction with rehabilitation or walking training, researchers are investigating its potential to improve hand function, locomotion, and respiration.
The treatment may also enhance adaptability in a brain-to-spine pathway thought to be crucial to voluntary control of movement.
More research is needed to better understand how and why AIH works and to optimize protocols, but so far results in humans appear promising with relatively minor risks.
American Association of Neurological Surgeons, Craig Hospital, Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Merck Manual, Shepherd Center.
BACKBONES connects people with spinal cord injury and their families through one-on-one pairing or an event near you, making it easy to meet others with similar backgrounds, injuries, and interests. https://backbonesonline.com
Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation funds research to develop treatments for paralysis caused by spinal cord injury or other nervous system disorders.
The Foundation also works to improve the quality of life for people living with paralysis through its grants program, National Paralysis Resource Center, and advocacy efforts.
For an overview of the Foundation’s research and advocacy initiatives, details on the Quality of Life Grants Program, or to connect with an Information Specialist or peer mentor, visit ChristopherReeve.org or write 636 Morris Turnpike, Suite 3A Short Hills, NJ 07078; toll-free 1-800-539-7309.
Craig Hospital supports a dedicated nurse line to answer non-emergency calls from people with SCI, Monday-Friday.
Educational materials are available online. https://craighospital.org
FacingDisability While spinal cord injury affects the entire family, there are few resources for families.
This website provides information and peer support for people with injuries and their families.
Sharing life experiences—by way of over 3,500 videos—with others who have been down the same road helps people find their own strength and support. https://facingdisability.com
International Spinal Cord Society, with a membership of clinicians and scientists from 87 countries, promotes education, research and clinical excellence, and produces the journal Spinal Cord. https://www.iscos.org.uk.
They offer a free online education resouce, elearnSCI.org, for spinal cord injury prevention and comprehensive clinical practice and rehabilitation.
Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) works toward quality healthcare, rehabilitation and civil rights for veterans and all citizens with spinal cord injuries and diseases.
PVA offers numerous publications and fact sheets and supports the Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine, which produces authoritative clinical guidelines for spinal cord injury.
PVA supports research by way of its Spinal Cord Research Foundation.
The organization sponsors the magazines PN/Paraplegia News and Sports ‘N Spokes. https://pva.org
SCI Information Network offers information about spinal cord injury, including new injuries, and is home to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center (NSCISC). https://www.uab.edu/medicine/sci or https://www.nscisc.uab.edu
Spinal Injury 101 is a video series from the Shepherd Center, with backing from the Reeve Foundation and the National Spinal Cord Injury Association.
Includes tutorial videos on SCI, acute management, secondary conditions and more. https://www.spinalinjury101.org
SPINALpedia is an Internet social mentoring network and video archive “that allows the spinal cord injury community to motivate each other with the knowledge and triumphs gained from our individual experiences.” https://spinalpedia.com
United Spinal Association (USA) provides expertise, peer support, access to resources and information, and offers a toll-free help line.
Canadian/American Spinal Research Organization is dedicated to physical improvement for persons with spinal cord injury through targeted medical research. https://www.csro.com
CatWalk Spinal Cord Injury Trust was founded by New Zealander Catriona Williams, injured in a 2002 riding accident.
The trust is dedicated to raising funds to support research targeting a cure for paralysis.
CenterWatch provides a list of approved clinical trials being conducted internationally. https://www.centerwatch.com
ClinicalTrials lists all federally supported clinical trials in the U.S., sorted by disease or condition, location, treatment or sponsor.
Developed by the National Library of Medicine. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov
Craig H. Neilsen Foundation was formed to improve the quality of life for those living with spinal cord injury and to support scientific exploration for therapies and treatments.
The foundation is the largest non-profit funding source for SCI research in the U.S. https://chnfoundation.org
Conquer Paralysis Now (formerly known as the Sam Schmidt Paralysis Foundation) helps individuals with spinal cord injuries and other illnesses by funding research, medical treatment, rehabilitation and technology advances.
The organization was originally named for Schmidt, a former race car driver living with quadriplegia. www.conquerparalysisnow.org
Dana Foundation provides reliable, accessible information on the brain and spinal cord, including research.
The Foundation offers numerous books and publications and sponsors Brain Awareness Week every March. https://www.dana.org
International Society for Stem Cell Research is a source for reliable information about stem cell research and clinical advances. https://www.isscr.org
International Spinal Research Trust is the UK’s leading charity funding medical research around the world to develop effective treatments for paralysis. https://spinal-research.org
Miami Project to Cure Paralysis is a research center at the University of Miami dedicated to finding treatments and, ultimately, cures for paralysis. https://www.themiamiproject.org
Mike Utley Foundation provides financial support to research, rehabilitation and education programs on spinal cord injury. https://www.mikeutley.org
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke is the primary federal funding source for all research related to the brain and spinal cord and provides authoritative research overviews for all diseases and conditions related to paralysis. https://www.ninds.nih.gov
PubMed, a service of the National Library of Medicine, provides access to over 30 million citations in medical literature back to the mid-1960s.
It includes links to many sites providing full text articles and other related resources.
Search using key word, researcher name, or journal title. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Reeve-Irvine Research Center was founded by philanthropist Joan Irvine Smith in honor of Christopher Reeve to study injuries and diseases of the spinal cord that result in paralysis.
Contact c/o University of California at Irvine; https://www.reeve.uci.edu.
The Roman Reed Program at the Reeve-Irvine Research Center is dedicated to finding cures for neurological disorders.
The program is named for California advocate Roman Reed, injured in a college football game. https://www.reeve.uci.edu/roman-reed
Rick Hansen Foundation was created in Canada in 1988 to support spinal cord injury research as well as wheelchair sports, injury prevention and rehabilitation programs. https://www.rickhansen.com
SCORE is dedicated to finding a cure for paralysis and also helps with out-of-pocket costs for home modifications, vehicle adaptations, etc., for young people who are injured in sporting events; https://scorefund.org
Society for Neuroscience is an organization of about 40,000 basic scientists and clinicians who study the brain and nervous system, including trauma and disease, brain development, sensation and perception, learning and memory, sleep, stress, aging and psychiatric disorders. https://www.sfn.org
Spinal Cord Injury Project at Rutgers University works to move therapies from laboratory to clinical trial and is home of the CareCure community. https://keck.rutgers.edu/
Spinal Cord Injury Research Program, U.S. Department of Defense was established by Congress in 2009 with a $35 million appropriation to support research into regenerating or repairing damaged spinal cords and improving rehabilitation therapies.
Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs: https://cdmrp.health.mil/scirp/default
Spinal Cord Research Foundation of the Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) funds research to treat spinal cord dysfunction and to enhance the health of people who are paralyzed. https://pva.org
Spinal Cure Australia (formerly Australasian Spinal Research Trust) was established in 1994 to fund scientific research to find cures for paralysis. https://www.spinalcure.org.au
The Neil Sachse Centre (NSC) at SAHMRI was founded in Australia to support SCI research.
Sachse had a sporting injury leading to quadriplegia. https://sahmri.org.au/research/themes/lifelong-health/programs/hopwood-centre-for-neurobiology/groups/neil-sachse-centre-for-spinal-cord-injury-research
Unite 2 Fight Paralysis (U2FP) advocates as “cure warriors” for SCI research and sponsors the annual Working to Walk research science meeting. https://u2fp.org
Veterans Affairs Rehabilitation Research and Development Service (RR&D) supports the study of pain, bowel and bladder function, FES, nerve plasticity, prosthetics, and more.
RR&D also publishes the Journal of Rehabilitation R&D and hosts the International Symposium on Neural Regeneration. https://www.rehab.research.va.gov
Wings for Life, based in Austria, finances research projects worldwide aimed at healing the injured spinal cord; projects are picked by an international group of reviewers to ensure the best possible investment of donations.https://www.wingsforlife.com/us
Yale Center for Neuroscience and Regeneration Research works to develop new treatments, and ultimately a cure, for spinal cord injury and related disorders.
The center is supported by the Paralyzed Veterans of America, the Department of Veterans Affairs and four other foundations. https://medicine.yale.edu/cnrr
While there is no evidence that the ancient Chinese practice of acupuncture can reduce the number of flareups or slow the progress of disability, it may help relieve some MS-related symptoms.
Acupuncture is a traditional Chinese medicine based on a theory of body functioning that involves the flow of energy through 14 pathways (called meridians) throughout the body.
Disease, as the theory goes, results from an imbalance or disruption in the flow of energy.
There have been no large-scale controlled clinical trials assessing the effectiveness of acupuncture on MS patients, though there are currently small sample studies underway.
Though not clinical trials, two large self-assessment surveys conducted in the United States and Canada showed that one in four respondents with MS had tried acupuncture for symptom relief.
About 10 to 15 percent said they planned to continue using acupuncture.
A National Institutes of Health panel evaluating studies done of acupuncture treating other diseases concluded it is a safe treatment without side effects.
Franklin D. Roosevelt PresideNtial Library and MusEUm / Margaret Suckley
Franklin D. Roosevelt, seldom seen as a polio survivor, with Ruthie Bie and Fala, 1941
In 2013, a groundbreaking study from the Reeve Foundation revealed that over 5.3 million Americans were living with paralysis – a number five times higher than previous estimates.
The data, gathered in one of the largest population-based samples of disability ever conducted, established the scope of the community, and helped reshape the conversation around urgent and too-often overlooked policy and research needs.
The study found that strokes were the leading cause of paralysis, affecting 1.8 million Americans, followed by spinal cord injury; all told, roughly 1 in 50 people reported living with some form of paralysis.
Documenting the vast number of people impacted by paralysis also helped highlight the social and economic challenges experienced by the community, from lower rates of employment and household incomes to a lack of health insurance.
The Reeve Foundation’s public policy team continues to share these findings with congressional leaders and advocate for resources and policies that directly address the inequities faced daily by people living with paralysis.
Motivated mouse: epidural stimulation plus treadmill training equals function.
Eric LeGrand, injured playing football for Rutgets University in 2010, doing Locomotor Training
The Spinal Cord Injury Model Systems (SCIMS) Centers Program was established by the federal government in 1970; the goal of the program has been to improve care and outcomes for individuals with spinal cord injury, based on research showing the superiority of comprehensive versus fragmented care.
The SCIMS Centers provide multidisciplinary care from emergency services through rehabilitation and re-entry into community life.
The centers also conduct research, provide education and disseminate information to improve the health and quality of life for individuals living with spinal cord injury.
There are currently 18 SCI Model Systems centers sponsored by the National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research; Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services; and the U.S. Department of Education.
University of Alabama at Birmingham Spinal Cord Injury Model SystemUniversity of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
Northern California Spinal Cord Injury Model System of Care (NCSCIMS)Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, CA
Southern California Spinal Cord Injury Model System Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center, Downey, CA
Rocky Mountain Regional Spinal Injury System Craig Hospital, Englewood, CO
National Capital Spinal Cord Injury Model SystemMedStar National Rehabilitation Hospital, Washington, DC
South Florida Spinal Cord Injury Model System University of Miami, Miami, FL
Southeastern Regional Spinal Cord Injury Care System Shepherd Center, Atlanta, GA
Midwest Regional Spinal Cord Injury Care System Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, IL
Spaulding New England Regional Spinal Cord Injury CenterRehabilitation Hospital/New England Regional SCI, Boston, MA
Michigan Spinal Cord Injury Model SystemUniversity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Minnesota Regional Spinal Cord Injury Model SystemUniversity of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
Northern New Jersey Spinal Cord Injury System Kessler Foundation Research Center, West Orange, NJ
Mount Sinai Hospital Spinal Cord Injury Model System Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY
Northeast Ohio Regional Spinal Cord Injury Model SystemCase Western Reserve, Cleveland, OH
University of Pittsburgh Model Center on Spinal Cord Injury UPMC Rehabilitation Institute, Pittsburgh, PA
Texas Model Spinal Cord Injury System at TIRR Memorial Hermann, Houston, TX
Virginia Consortium for SCI CareVirginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
I live a fearless life on a daily basis.
I’m reminded of that every time I come into New York, because I’m put in the back of a van, strapped down by four straps, and driven around by a bunch of guys who just happen to be firefighters from Yonkers.
These guys are used to driving fire trucks—at great speed—so when I get into the van, I have to give it up.
As a self-confessed control freak from way back in my early childhood, being able to sit in the back, assume that we’re going to safely reach our destination, and actually doze off has been big for me.
This one hour van trip is a good metaphor for the journey I’d like to talk about.
For so many of us, the source of our fear is the loss of control.
But the more we try to control what happens to us, the greater our fear that we’re no longer empowered, that there’s no safety net, and that dangerous, unexpected things may happen.
Ironically, the act of trying to control what happens is what actually robs us of great experiences and diminishes us.
The lesson I had to learn when I had my injury was pretty drastic because my life before that as an actor had been one of self-sufficiency, perseverance, and discipline.
I had been extremely self-sufficient from the time I finished high school, all the way through college and graduate school, and as I made my way to Off-Broadway, Broadway, television and film.
I had done well and was used to being in charge.
My accident was a strange and very close call.
If I had landed differently, even by a millimeter in one direction, I wouldn’t have been injured; if I had landed a millimeter the other way, I wouldn’t be here today.
I had, at best, a 40 percent chance of surviving my surgery, during which my head was actually reattached to my neck.
Also during the surgery, I nearly died as a result of a drug reaction.
I was told I would never again move below my shoulders, that I would absolutely have no further recovery, and that my life expectancy at 42 years of age was, at best, six to seven more years.
I dealt with it with my wife Dana at my side, thank God.
We just decided not to buy into the fear that people tried to instill in us.
This decision was the most important of all.
How many people are walking around today three years after they were told that they only had six months to live?
How many of us are doing things now that we were told that we could never do?
One of the keys to going ahead and conquering fear is to ignore your moods.
Ignore it when you feel like you really don’t want to do whatever it is today.
Ignore it when you feel like you can’t be bothered.
Often you start the day feeling bad—feeling like you don’t want to do something or you are treading water and getting nowhere or you can’t keep going—and the day turns out to be one of the best you’re ever going to have.
You have to leave yourself open to possibility.
By staying in the moment regardless of how you actually feel, you leave yourself open for surprises, both on a big scale and on a little scale.
I am proud of what I have achieved, but my path hasn’t been without problems and difficulties.
About a year ago, I was the second patient in the world to have diaphragm pacing implanted into my body.
It’s like a cardiac pacemaker, but it stimulates the diaphragm to create normal breathing and replace the ventilator.
I felt that it was safe and that there was a good chance it would work.
For over a year now, I’ve had infections and all kinds of signs of rejection by my body, and the site of implantation is still not closed.
That’s why I am still on this ventilator, why I can’t go into the swimming pool anymore, and why I haven’t moved beyond my initial level of recovery, where I plateaued.
And yet I’m telling you this because it is important to know that living a fearless life means that you might go through an experience that doesn’t actually work out for you.
The way to stay positive, to avoid being bitter or feeling like a failure, is to look at the fact it might help somebody else.
For example, this failure of the diaphragm pacing has led to modifications in how doctors perform the procedure, and the set of patients who followed me have all gotten off the ventilator.
In 1996 I was one of the first to experiment with something called “treadmill walking therapy,” where I was held up by a harness and put on a treadmill, just like in a gym.
This kind of therapy works because the spine has energy and memory, and so the central pattern generator in the lumbar area remembers how to walk.
It doesn’t take much brain power to walk.
After 60 days of treadmill therapy, a lot of paraplegic patients have been able to walk again.
So far in the United States alone, more than 500 people have made it out of their wheelchairs that way.
I, however, had an accident when I was put on a treadmill one day because the doctors wanted to shoot a video of how it works.
They cranked up the treadmill to three and a half miles an hour.
I got up on it, and I took some beautiful steps.
It was perfect, and the actor in me was happy.
But then I broke my leg.
My femur, the big bone in my thigh, snapped right in half.
I still have a 12-inch metal plate with 15 screws in there holding it together.
It turned out that I had osteoporosis and my bone density wasn’t strong enough to take the pace of the treadmill.
So for me, there is no more treadmill at the moment.
But for others, there is a new protocol, a new standard.
Now they know that before they put anybody on a treadmill, they must do a bone density scan to make sure the patient doesn’t have osteoporosis.
Something good came out of that.
You might wonder why I went in so early on some of these experiments.
I’d been pushing neuroscientists to be fearless, to not get hung up in the laboratory doing experiments forever.
So, I felt that if I was pushing scientists to be fearless on the biological level, I had to do the most I could on the rehab level.
There are also going to be times in life when living fearlessly is very simple.
One of the first things that happened after surviving my surgery was that I lost my finesse.
My social skills went down the drain.
I realized that social skills are, to a large extent, mini-lies.
Now when someone asks me a question, I have learned to tell the truth because, really, what the hell do I have to lose?
There are lots of ways of being fearless.
To a large extent, the key to fearlessness is the “no matter what.”
It’s truly amazing what we can do by allowing the spirit and mind to flourish.
Our capabilities go way beyond our understanding.
Trust in that and go forward.
Get past the clutter, the noise inside you that says, “I can’t, I can’t, I’m not good enough, I don’t feel like it, I’m sick, I don’t want to.”
That is just like static on a radio.
Just clear the channel, find good reception, and you’ll be amazed by what you can do.
This essay was adapted from Reeve’s closing speech at a Living a Fearless Life conference in New York City in the spring of 2004, hosted by The Omega Institute, www.eomega.org
Reeve addressing the Democratic National Convention, 1996
The lesson I had to learn when I had my injury was pretty drastic... my life before that as an actor had been one of self-sufficiency, perseverance, and discipline.
PVA Clinical Guidelines for Healthcare Professionals
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Healthcare Professionals
Bladder Management for Adults with Spinal Cord Injury
Bone Health and Osteoporosis Management in Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury
Early Acute Management in Adults with Spinal Cord Injury
Evaluation and Management of Autonomic Dysreflexia and Other Autonomic Dysfunctions
Identification of Cardiometabolic Risk after Spinal Cord Injury
Management of Mental Health Disorders, Substance Use Disorders, and Suicide in Adults with Spinal Cord Injury
Management of Neurogenic Bowel Dysfunction in Adults after Spinal Cord Injury
Outcomes Following Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury
Preservation of Upper Limb Function Following Spinal Cord Injury
Pressure Ulcer Prevention and Treatment Following Spinal Cord Injury, 2nd Edition
Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism in Individuals with Spinal Cord Injury
Respiratory Management Following Spinal Cord Injury
Sexuality and Reproductive Health in Adults with Spinal Cord Injury
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Healthcare Professionals in Spanish
The guidelines listed below are PVA’s versions for consumers.
Bladder Management Following Spinal Cord Injury:
Cardiometabolic Risk after Spinal Cord Injury
More About Autonomic Dysreflexia and Other Autonomic Dysfunctions
Preservation Of Upper Limb Function Following Spinal Cord Injury:
Respiratory Management Following Spinal Cord Injury:
The North American Clinical Trials Network (NACTN) works to bring promising therapies out of the laboratory and into clinical trials in a manner that provides strong evidence of effectiveness and safety.
By uniting experts across the country, NACTN is gathering valid, meaningful data to speed the delivery of new therapies to the community.
NACTN supports a network of clinical centers as well as clinical coordinating, data management and pharmacology sites, all dedicated to establishing best practices in the care and treatment of spinal cord injury.
These sites have medical, nursing and rehabilitation personnel who are skilled in the evaluation and management of spinal cord injury.
In addition to translating discoveries from the lab into clinical studies, NACTN maintains a patient registry of information that is important to the design and testing of possible new treatments for SCI.
For more information about participating centers and the Reeve Foundation’s research initiatives, please visit ChristopherReeve.org/NACTN.
Drugs and treatments are developed—or as the research community says it, “translated” — from laboratory experiments.
Clinical research is usually conducted via a series of trials that begin with a few people and become progressively larger as safety, efficacy, and dosage are better understood.
Because full-scale clinical trials are expensive and time consuming, usually only the most promising of treatments emerging from research labs are selected in the translation process.
A National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke panel noted that future trials on treating paralysis should be based on minimum risk with significant benefit in a relevant animal model that has been independently replicated by other labs.
Questions remain as to what minimal level of clinical improvement would warrant various levels of risk and expectation.
Once laboratory and animal studies show promise, a Phase I clinical trial is initiated, used to test the safety of a therapy for a particular disease or condition.
A Phase II clinical trial usually involves more subjects at several different centers and is used to test safety and efficacy on a broader scale, such as to test different dosing for medications or to perfect techniques for surgery.
A Phase III clinical trial involves many centers and sometimes hundreds of subjects.
The trial usually involves two patient groups comparing different treatments, or, if there is only one treatment to test, patients who do not receive the test therapy get a placebo (dummy drug) instead.
Many Phase III trials are double-blinded (neither the subjects nor the doctors treating them know which treatment a subject receives) and randomized (placing subjects into one of the treatment groups in a way that can’t be predicted by the patients or investigators).
Success in Phase III leads to approval by the FDA for clinical use.
A Phase IV trial might be carried out after approval to detect possible rare, undesirable side effects that previous phases did not detect.
The government has strict safeguards to protect people who participate in clinical trials.
Every clinical trial in the United States must be approved and monitored by an Institutional Review Board (IRB), an independent committee of physicians, statisticians, community advocates, and others who assess risk and ensure that the trial is ethical and that the rights of study participants are protected.
The IRB makes sure participants know as much as possible.
Informed consent is a process that stresses the need for participants to understand the key facts about a clinical trial before deciding whether or not to join.
These facts include: why the research is being done; who the researchers are; what the researchers want to accomplish; what will be done during the trial and for how long; what risks and benefits can be expected; and what the possible side effects are.
Informed consent continues as long as you are in the study.
Before joining a trial, participants must meet the study’s eligibility guidelines, such as age, type of disease, medical history, and current medical condition.
People may leave a trial at any time.
For information about all clinical trials taking place in the United States,see https://clinicaltrials.gov (search by condition or diagnosis).
Be very cautious before joining a trial outside the jurisdiction of the FDA or seeking an unproven or experimental treatment.
Legitimate clinical trials never charge patients to participate.
Researchers are currently studying whether stem cells can repair or replace cells or tissues that are damaged or destroyed by disease and injuries.
Here is a brief primer on stem cell terminology.
A cell from the embryo, fetus, or adult that, under certain conditions, has the ability to reproduce itself for long periods or, in the case of adult stem cells, throughout the life of the organism.
A stem cell can give rise to specialized cells that make up the tissues and organs of the body.
A cell from the embryonic germ layers, from which all cells of the body arise that can develop and self-replicate.
Until recently the only known sources of human pluripotent stem cells were human embryos or certain kinds of fetal tissue; in 2006, scientists in Japan discovered a way to genetically reprogram skin cells to become very similar to embryonic stem cells.
Since these cells are specific to the donor, this increases compatibility if such cells were to be used for therapies, thus forming the basis for personalized medicine.
However, as with embryonic stem cells, researchers do not fully understand how iPSCs are locked into their cell lineages.
Currently, iPSCs are being tested experimentally in numerous disease models, including SCI; moreover, iPSCs are also being used widely as tools to model disease states in a culture dish, providing a unique way to screen therapeutic agents.
Derived from embryos that develop from eggs that have been fertilized in vitro in a fertilization clinic and then donated for research purposes with informed consent of the donors.
Current challenges include directing differentiation of embryonic stem cells into specialized cell populations and to devising ways to control their proliferation once placed in people.
Uncontrolled, these cells can form teratomas, a benign form of cancer.
The process by which an unspecialized cell (such as a stem cell) specializes into one of the many cells that make up the body.
During differentiation, certain genes become activated and others are inactivated in an intricately regulated fashion.
An undifferentiated (unspecialized) cell that occurs in a differentiated (specialized) tissue, renews itself, and becomes specialized to maintain and repair the tissue in which it is found.
Adult stem cells are capable of making identical copies of themselves for the lifetime of the organism.
These cells have been identified in brain, bone marrow, peripheral blood, blood vessels, skeletal muscle, skin, teeth, heart, gut, liver, ovarian epithelium, fat and testis.
This type of cell can occur in fetal or adult tissues and is partially specialized.
When a progenitor/precursor cell divides, it can form similar cells or it can form two specialized cells, neither of which is capable of replicating itself.
Somatic cell nuclear transfer (also known as therapeutic cloning):
This process involves removing the nucleus of an unfertilized egg cell, replacing it with the material from the nucleus of a “somatic cell” (e.g., skin, heart, or nerve cell), and stimulating this cell to begin dividing.
Stem cells can be extracted five to six days later.
While stem cell therapy may eventually yield gains for individuals living with spinal cord injuries, it’s important to remain cautious until comprehensive research demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of potential treatments.
The FDA continues to warn patients about seeking unproven and potentially harmful treatment from rogue stem-cell clinics that operate within the U.S. and around the world.
The only stem cell treatments currently approved by the FDA are for certain cancers and disorders of the blood and immune system.
In 2019, Japan became the first government to approve a stem-cell treatment for spinal cord injuries.
But, in an article in Nature, stem cell researchers in the U.S. voiced concerns that there was insufficient evidence the treatment worked.
A recent phase I safety study of mesenchymal stem cell treatment for spinal cord injury conducted by the Mayo Clinic reported promising results, but further study and more large-scale clinical trials are needed.
Before participating in any stem cell treatment, make sure it is FDA approved or part of an FDA approved clinical trial.
Some essential questions to ask a stem cell clinic or trial:
Will this affect whether I can get into another clinical trial?
How will this be measured, and how long will it take?
What other medications or special care might I need?
How is this stem cell procedure done?
What is the source of the stem cells?
How are the stem cells identified, isolated, and grown?
Are the cells differentiated into specialized cells before therapy?
How do I know if the cells are delivered to the right part of my body?
If the cells are not my own, how will my immune system be prevented from reacting to the transplanted cells?
What do the cells actually do, and is there scientific evidence that this procedure could work for my disease or condition?
NIH: https://stemcells.nih.gov; International Society for Stem Cell Research: https://www.isscr.org; ISSCR Patient Handbook on Stem Cell Therapies: https://www.closerlookatstemcells.org; FDA Stem Cell Warning: www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/fda-warns-about-stem-cell-therapies
The effect a spinal cord injury has on mobility varies widely, from creating weakness in a limited region of the body to causing paralysis and loss of sensation in all four limbs.
People with incomplete injuries—those where messages can still travel across the site of the injury to the brain—have the best chance of regaining some level of walking.
Among quadriplegics, this can include individuals with C1-C8 injuries classified AIS* C-D, and for paraplegics, those with T1–S1 injuries classified AIS C-D.
For L2 injuries and below, individuals with both motor complete and incomplete injuries (classified AIS A-D) have the potential of being able to walk using bracing and assistive devices.
As with any spinal cord injury, a range of abilities is found among ‘walking’ quadriplegics and paraplegics; there is no one-size-fits-all definition or outcome.
One person might choose a mix of wheelchair and walking for moving around inside the home, but always use a wheelchair in public; another may count walking as the primary means of navigating both home and community, with limited wheelchair use overall.
Howard Menaker became paralyzed from the chest down in 2014 after an infection that developed during lower back surgery caused swelling which compressed his spine.
A couple months after the injury, when he could still barely sit up, he began an intensive rehabilitation program at the International Center for Spinal Cord Injury (ICSCI) at the Kennedy Krieger Institute.
“My mobility has progressed from being entirely dependent on a wheelchair to learning how to stand, to walking with a walker, to using lofstrand crutches and now, sometimes, just a quad cane,” Menaker says.
At home, Menaker rarely uses his wheelchair, preferring crutches or the quad cane he grows more comfortable with each day.
He weighs factors like how far he’ll have to walk and what his energy level is when deciding how to balance walking and wheelchair use in public spaces.
When attending the theater with his husband, Menaker sometimes uses his wheelchair to travel from the parking garage, but switches to crutches when he reaches the lobby.
For trips with many stops, he might choose the wheelchair to avoid fatigue, but he visits his barber —two blocks away and two flights up —on crutches.
“I’m really fortunate and I know that,” Menaker says.
“And I know the more I walk, the better I can walk.”
Menaker has maintained his progress through regular visits to the ICSCI’s activity-based therapy program where doctors monitor his cardiovascular fitness and bone density and oversee gait training that helps him practice correct walking patterns.
Dr. Cristina Sadowsky, Clinical Director of the ICSCI, says activity is important for everyone with a spinal cord injury, including those who move between walking and using a wheelchair.
Gait training helps avoid abnormal walking patterns that can cause orthopedic issues and nerve pain.
Exercise can mitigate overuse although changes to the body that accompany aging, including degenerative joints, may eventually limit walking ability.
People who both walk and use wheelchairs must be attuned to the dangers of falling.
Slippery floors, elevated thresholds and uneven cobblestones on a patio can become hazards that lead to serious injuries like broken bones and concussions.
Learning how to avoid falls and, when that’s not possible, how to slide into a fall more safely is important for all ‘walking’ quadriplegics and paraplegics.
Regaining mobility after a spinal cord injury to the extent that functional walking is possible can sometimes cause unexpectedly complicated emotions.
Donna Lowich, now a Senior Information Specialist at the Reeve Foundation, sustained a C4, C5, C6 injury in 1985 when her son Jeffrey was just four years old.
Though she worked hard to be able to use a walker, people were not always kind when she left her wheelchair.
At the grocery store, where she would use the cart in place of the walker, her slower steps prompted strangers to mutter under their breath about her pace.
Once, a neighbor wondered why, if she could use an assisted device, she couldn’t just walk on her own.
“It’s a difficult situation to explain,” Lowich said of trying to convey the specific circumstances of an injury.
In the early years, it was a struggle to move between walking and the wheelchair; sometimes, neither one felt right.
Lowich grew frustrated using a walker in public when she couldn’t keep up with others, and strangers’ reactions made her feel embarrassed or even in danger of falling as they rushed to move around her.
But at the same time, she resisted using the wheelchair.
“I kept saying that I’d gotten this far, going from not being able to walk at all to this,” she says.
“I felt like when I used the wheelchair, it was kind of like saying I’d reached my potential.
And I didn’t want to say that.”
Eventually, Lowich realized that, whether using the walker to shop for her family or a wheelchair to get to the ball field to watch Jeffrey play, the choices she made about mobility didn’t define her; they simply helped her access the life she wanted.
“You have to find the balance,” she says.
Linda Schultz, PhD, CRRN, aka Nurse Linda, is a leader, teacher, and provider of rehabilitation nursing for over 30 years.
In fact, Nurse Linda worked closely with Christopher Reeve on his recovery and has been advocating for the Reeve Foundation ever since.
Nurse Linda is a regular webinar provider and blogger for the Reeve Foundation.
She focuses on contributing functional advice, providing the “how-to” on integrating various healthcare improvements into daily life, and answering your specific questions.
You can sign up for Nurse Linda’s monthly webinars or reach her through the “Ask Nurse Linda” on-demand webpage at:
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) refers to a group of inherited neuromuscular diseases that affect the nerve cells (motor neurons) and the control of voluntary muscles.
SMA, the leading genetic cause of death in infants and toddlers, causes lower motor neurons in the base of the brain and the spinal cord to disintegrate, preventing them from delivering the necessary signals for normal muscle function.
Involuntary muscles, such as those that control bladder and bowel function, are not affected in SMA.
Hearing and vision are not affected, nor is someone’s learning or social skills.
The three major childhood-onset forms of SMA are now usually called Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3.
All three types are also known as autosomal recessive SMA—both parents must pass on the defective gene in order for their children to inherit the disease.
All forms of SMA affect the skeletal muscles of the trunk and limbs.
In general, those muscles closer to the center of the body are more affected than those farther away.
SMA Type 1, the most severe form, mostly affects the neurons controlling the mouth and throat muscles and therefore involves more problems with chewing and swallowing.
Respiratory muscles are involved to varying degrees in all forms of the disease.
In SMA Type 1, the onset of the disease is noted within the first six months of the child’s life.
SMA Type 1 can be fatal early in life if not treated.
SMA Type 2 is an intermediate form of the disease.
Onset is between seven and eighteen months.
Children with SMA Type 2 are usually able to sit without support but have historically not been able to walk and therefore use a wheelchair.
Like all types of SMA, breathing and swallowing difficulties pose one of the bigger threats with this condition.
SMA Type 3 is a milder form of this condition.
Onset occurs after the age of eighteen months and most often between the ages of five and fifteen.
Weakness of the muscles of chewing and swallowing is rare, and respiratory effects are generally not as severe as in the first two forms.
Individuals with SMA are usually able to walk initially, but may lose mobility as they grow older.
Respiratory complications, if they occur, may pose a threat.
The first FDA-approved treatment drug for SMA became available in 2016; since then, two more treatment drugs have become available.
As of 2023, people with SMA have three medication treatment options if they choose to pursue that:
While Spinraza and Evrysdi are approved for people of all ages, Zolgensma is only available for children under 2 years old.
In addition, physical therapy and orthopedic devices can help preserve walking function.
Respiratory therapy can provide crucial interventions for breathing abilities.
Braces or surgery may also help to counteract scoliosis, or curvature of the spine.
Researchers around the world have collaborated to find the causes of SMA, which in most cases result from a deficiency of a protein called SMN (survival of motor neuron).
This deficiency occurs when a mutation is present in both copies of the SMN1 gene—one on each chromosome 5.
Scientists hope to characterize the genes, study gene function and disease course, and find ways to prevent, treat, and, ultimately, cure these diseases.
CureSMA, Spinal Muscular Atrophy Foundation, Muscular Dystrophy Association, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
CureSMA provides support programs for people living with SMA and their families, as well as funding and directing comprehensive research for treatments and a cure. https://www.curesma.org
Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) provides services and supports research for a group of hereditary muscle-destroying disorders, including spinal muscular atrophies. https://www.mda.org/disease/spinal-muscular-atrophy
Spinal Muscular Atrophy Foundation hopes to accelerate the development of a treatment or cure for SMA. https://smafoundation.org
Brain and spinal cord tumors feature abnormal tissue growth inside the skull or the bony spinal column.
Tumors are classified as benign (noncancerous) if the cells that make up the growth are similar to normal cells, grow slowly, and are confined to one location.
Tumors are malignant (cancerous) when the cells are different from normal cells, grow quickly, and can spread easily to other locations.
Because the central nervous system (CNS) is housed within rigid, bony quarters (the skull and spinal column), any abnormal growth can place pressure on sensitive nerve tissues and impair function.
While malignant cells elsewhere in the body can easily seed tumors inside the brain and spinal cord, malignant CNS tumors rarely spread out to other body parts.
Most spinal cord cancers are metastatic, meaning that they arise from a wide variety of primary cancers.
These include lung, breast, prostate, head and neck, gynecologic, gastrointestinal, thyroid, melanoma, and renal cell carcinoma.
When new tumors begin within the brain or spinal cord, they are called primary tumors.
Primary CNS tumors rarely grow from neurons—nerve cells that perform the nervous system’s important functions—because once neurons are mature they no longer divide and multiply.
Instead, most tumors are caused by out-of-control growth among cells that surround and support neurons.
Primary CNS tumors—such as gliomas and meningiomas—are named by the types of cells comprising them, their location, or both.
The cause of most primary brain and spinal cord tumors remains a mystery.
Scientists don’t know exactly why and how cells in the nervous system or elsewhere in the body lose their normal identity and grow uncontrollably.
Some of the possible causes under investigation include viruses, defective genes, and chemicals.
Brain and spinal cord tumors are not contagious or, at this time, preventable.
Brain tumors are the most common form of solid tumor in children.
Spinal cord tumors are less common than brain tumors.
Although spinal cord tumors affect people of all ages, they are most common in young and middle-aged adults.
Brain and spinal cord tumors cause many diverse symptoms, which generally develop slowly and worsen over time.
Some of the more common symptoms of a brain tumor include headaches; seizures (a disruption of the normal flow of brain cell electricity that can lead to convulsions, loss of consciousness, or loss of bladder control); nausea and vomiting; and vision or hearing problems.
Increased intracranial pressure can also decrease blood flow in the eye and trigger swelling of the optic nerve, which in turn causes blurred vision, double vision, or partial visual loss.
Other symptoms of a CNS tumor may include the following: behavioral and cognitive symptoms, motor or balance problems, pain, sensory changes such as numbness, and decreased skin sensitivity to temperature.
Special imaging techniques, especially computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), have greatly improved the diagnosis of CNS tumors.
In many cases, these scans can detect the presence of a tumor even if it is less than half an inch across.
The three most commonly used treatments are surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.
When a tumor compresses the spinal cord or its surrounding structures, corticosteroids may be given to reduce the swelling and preserve nerve function until the tumor can be removed.
Surgery to remove as much tumor as possible is usually the first step in treating an accessible tumor—as long as there is little risk of neurological damage.
Fortunately, neurosurgical advances now make it possible for doctors to reach tumors that were previously considered inaccessible.
Doctors treat most malignant, inaccessible, or inoperable CNS tumors with radiation and/or chemotherapy.
Radiation therapy bombards tumor cells with lethal beams of energy.
Chemotherapy uses tumor-killing drugs that are given orally or injected into the bloodstream.
Because not all tumors are vulnerable to the same anticancer drugs, doctors often use a combination of drugs for chemotherapy.
The overall outcome of radiation therapy is not always good.
Radiation can damage spinal cord myelin, which can lead to paralysis.
Researchers are looking for better ways to target radiation or enhance its effectiveness, perhaps by making tumor tissue more vulnerable.
Researchers are studying brachytherapy (small radioactive pellets implanted directly into the tumor) as the optimum way to deliver radiotherapy to the tumor while sparing surrounding normal tissues.
Some cells within tumors are quite resistant to radiation.
Using a gene therapy approach, scientists hope to kill these cells by inserting a “suicide” gene that could make the tumor cells sensitive to certain drugs or program the cancerous cells to self-destruct.
Blocking the formation of blood vessels (angiogenesis) is a very promising tool for the treatment of various cancers.
Since brain tumors are the most angiogenic of all cancers, blocking their blood supply might prove to be especially effective.
The gamma knife is a newer tool that provides a precisely focused beam of radiation energy that delivers a single dose of radiation on target.
The gamma knife does not require a surgical incision; doctors have found it can help them reach and treat some small tumors that are not accessible through surgery.
Although most primary tumors of the spinal cord are not life-threatening, they can cause significant disability.
Goals of rehabilitation include functional improvement in mobility, self-care, and pain management.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, American Brain Tumor Association, National Cancer Institute
American Brain Tumor Association (ABTA) supports medical research and offers information and support for people with tumors and their families. https://www.abta.org
Making Headway Foundation offers services and funds research for children with brain or spinal cord tumors. https://makingheadway.org
Musella Foundation for Brain Tumor Research & Information, Inc. is dedicated to improving the quality of life for brain tumor survivors.
The Foundation has information on clinical trials and treatment outcomes. https://virtualtrials.org/index.cfm
National Brain Tumor Society funds research to find treatments and improve clinical care for brain and spinal cord tumors.
It offers information and access to quality of life and psychosocial support. https://braintumor.org
National Cancer Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Health and Human Services with an annual research budget of over $7 billion, is the leading U.S. agency to fight cancer of all kinds.
Includes resources and information on brain and spinal cord cancers. https://www.cancer.gov
A stroke occurs when the blood supply to the brain is suddenly blocked or when a blood vessel in the brain bursts.
Deprived of oxygen, nerve cells in the affected area of the brain can’t function and die within minutes.
A person with loss of blood flow to the heart is said to be having a heart attack; similarly, a person with loss of blood flow to the brain or sudden bleeding in the brain can be said to be having a “brain attack.”
Although stroke is a disease of the brain, it can affect the entire body, causing cognitive and memory deficits, speech problems, emotional difficulties, daily living problems, and pain.
Paralysis is a common outcome of stroke, often on one side of the body (hemiplegia).
The paralysis or weakness may affect only the face, an arm or a leg, or it may affect one entire side of the body and face.
A person who suffers a stroke in the left hemisphere of the brain will show right-sided paralysis, or paresis.
Likewise, a person with a stroke in the right hemisphere will show deficits on the left side of the body.
There are two main types of stroke.
Ischemic strokes occur as a result of an obstruction (clot) within a blood vessel supplying blood to the brain; ischemic strokes account for about 87 percent of all cases.
Hemorrhagic strokes result from a weakened blood vessel that ruptures and bleeds into the surrounding brain.
Stroke is the nation’s fifth leading cause of death and is a leading cause of serious, long-term disability in the United States.
Each year, about 795,000 people in the Unites States have strokes; of these incidents, 137,000 of the people die.
The most important risks for stroke are hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, and cigarette smoking.
Others include heavy alcohol consumption, high blood cholesterol levels, illicit drug use, and genetic or congenital conditions, particularly vascular abnormalities.
An increase in the red blood cell count is another risk factor for stroke—excess red blood cells thicken the blood and make clots more likely.
Eighty percent of strokes are preventable.
The symptoms of a stroke include sudden numbness or weakness, especially on one side of the body; confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech; vision impairment in one or both eyes; sudden difficulties walking; dizziness or loss of balance or coordination; and severe headache with no known cause.
Ischemic stroke is treated by removing the obstruction and restoring blood flow to the brain.
In hemorrhagic stroke, doctors attempt to prevent the rupture and bleeding of aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations.
When blood flow to the brain is interrupted, some brain cells die immediately, while others remain at risk.
The damaged cells can often be saved by early intervention with a clot-dissolving drug called tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) if administered within three hours of the onset of the stroke.
Unfortunately, only 3 to 5 percent of those who suffer a stroke reach the hospital in time to receive treatment.
The appropriate response to a brain attack is emergency action—every minute lost, from the onset of symptoms to the time of emergency room contact, cuts into the limited window of opportunity for intervention.
Meanwhile, other neuroprotective drugs are being developed to prevent the wave of damage after the initial attack.
The brain often compensates for the damage caused by stroke.
Some of the brain cells that do not die may resume functioning.
Sometimes, one region of the brain takes over for a region damaged by the stroke.
Stroke survivors sometimes experience remarkable and unanticipated recoveries that can’t be explained.
General recovery guidelines show that 10 percent of stroke survivors recover almost completely; 25 percent recover with minor impairments; 40 percent experience moderate to severe impairments requiring special care; 10 percent require care in a nursing home or other long-term care facility; 15 percent die shortly after the stroke.
This doesn’t reverse the effects of a stroke but rehab builds strength, capability, and confidence so a person can continue daily activities despite the effects of stroke.
Such activities may include the following: self-care skills such as feeding, grooming, bathing, and dressing; mobility skills such as transferring, walking, or moving a wheelchair; communication skills; cognitive skills such as memory or problem-solving; and social skills for interacting with other people.
Rehabilitation starts in the hospital and as soon as possible.
For those who are stable, rehab may begin within two days after the stroke has occurred and continue as necessary after release from the hospital.
Rehabilitation options may include the rehab unit of a hospital, a subacute care unit, a specialty rehab hospital, home therapy, outpatient care, or long-term care in a nursing facility.
Stroke may cause problems with thinking, awareness, attention, learning, judgment, and memory.
A stroke survivor may be unaware of his or her surroundings.
Language problems are common, usually the result of damage to the left lobes of the brain.
Also, stroke survivors may experience pain, uncomfortable numbness, or strange sensations, due to many factors including damage to the sensory regions of the brain, stiff joints, or a disabled limb.
Many people who have had strokes are affected by spasticity, which causes stiff, tight muscles.
Muscle tightness prevents people from doing everyday things such as holding a spoon or tying shoelaces.
A combination of medication and physical therapy can loosen the muscles.
Some stroke survivors may be candidates for intrathecal baclofen, which places a pump into the abdominal wall to deliver small doses of liquid baclofen into the fluid surrounding the spinal cord.
This relaxes the muscles without the side effects often associated with the drug.
A stroke can also lead to emotional problems.
Stroke patients may have difficulty controlling their emotions or may express inappropriate emotions in certain situations.
One common disability that occurs with many stroke patients is depression.
A depressed person may refuse or neglect to take medications, may not be motivated to perform exercises that will improve mobility, or may be irritable.
Depression can create a vicious cycle—it deprives the stroke survivor of social contacts, which could in turn help dispel depression.
Family can help by encouraging leisure activities.
Chronic depression can be treated with counseling, group therapy, or antidepressant medications.
Stroke survivors often find that once-simple tasks around the house become extremely difficult or impossible.
Many adaptive devices and techniques are available to help people retain their independence and function safely and easily.
The home usually can be modified so the stroke survivor can manage personal needs.
See Chapter 5 for more on home modification and adaptive equipment.
There are numerous research projects related to preventing and treating stroke.
When a stroke occurs, some brain cells die immediately; others remain at risk for hours and even days due to an ongoing sequence of destruction.
Some damaged cells can be saved by early intervention with drugs.
The search for effective neuroprotective drugs continues.
Meanwhile, delivery methods and refinements of t-PA are being developed, including intra-arterial t-PA, which is infused into a main artery in the neck or even smaller arteries in the brain for faster, safer delivery.
Here are some of the research leads for treating stroke:
An enzyme (DSPA) found in saliva from vampire bats may help dissolve blood clots in the brains of stroke survivors.
This enzyme may be much more potent than existing anticoagulant drugs and may cause fewer bleeding problems because it only targets the clot itself.
Erythropoietin, a hormone produced by the kidney, appears to protect some neurons from executing genetically programmed “cell suicide” missions.
A protein called fibronectin may protect against serious brain damage from stroke.
Trials have taken place to see if taking amphetamines for several weeks after a stroke will help kick-start the process of self-repair in the brain.
Results have been inconclusive but more research is needed.
For many years, doctors have relied on warfarin, a drug with potentially dangerous side effects (it is also used as rat poison), to reduce the risk of stroke in people at risk for clotting in the heart.
Cell transplantation has shown some early-trial success in humans who have had a stroke.
Researchers have reported that transplanted adult stem cells (from bone marrow) restored function in laboratory animals with stroke.
Human umbilical cord blood cells have been effective in animal models; trials are underway to test these cells in children with strokes.
For information on clinical trials, see www.clinicaltrials.gov.
Research advances have led to new therapies and new hope for people who are at risk or who have had a stroke.
For example, the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study found a 33 percent reduction in stroke incidence in diabetics who were given the hypertension drug ramipril.
Treatment with statins (cholesterol-lowering drugs) decreases the risk of stroke as well as heart attacks in people with known coronary heart disease.
Clinical trials have tested the safety and effectiveness of a protein called E-selectin, administered by way of a nasal spray, to prevent the formation of blood clots that could cause stroke.
In the area of stroke rehabilitation, an approach called Constraint-Induced Movement-based Therapy (CIMT) has improved recovery in people who have lost some function in a single limb.
The therapy entails immobilizing a patient’s good limb to force use of the weakened limb.
CIMT is thought to promote a remodeling of nerve pathways, or plasticity.
American Stroke Association, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
American Stroke Association (ASA), affiliated with the American Heart Association, spotlights prevention, provides educational resources, and funds research.
ASA features the Stroke Family Support Network, which provides information and support to stroke families at any stage of recovery. https://www.stroke.org
Children’s Hemiplegia and Stroke Association (CHASA) provides assistance, information, and counseling to families of children who survived an early brain injury.
Topics include medical conditions, rehabilitation, daily living, finances, and more. https://chasa.org
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) seeks and uses knowledge about the brain and nervous system to reduce the burden of neurological disease for all people. https://www.ninds.nih.gov
World Stroke Organization promotes stroke prevention, education, clinical research, and care for people living with stroke and vascular dementia. https://www.world-stroke.org
Transverse myelitis (TM) is a neurological disorder caused by inflammation of the spinal cord.
Attacks of inflammation can damage or destroy myelin, the fatty insulating substance that covers nerve cell fibers.
This causes scars that interrupt communication between the nerves in the spinal cord and the rest of the body.
Symptoms of TM include a loss of spinal cord function over several hours to several weeks.
What usually begins as a sudden onset of lower back pain, muscle weakness, or abnormal sensations in the toes and feet can rapidly progress to more severe symptoms, including paralysis.
Demyelination (loss of nerve fiber conductivity) usually occurs at the thoracic level, causing problems with leg movement and bowel and bladder control.
Some people recover from TM with minor or no lasting problems, while others have permanent impairments that affect their ability to perform ordinary tasks of daily living.
Transverse myelitis occurs in adults and children, in men and women, and in all races.
The peak number of new cases per year appears to occur in people between ten and 19 years and 30 and 39 years of age.
About 1,400 new cases of transverse myelitis are diagnosed annually in the United States, and approximately 33,000 Americans have some type of disability resulting from TM.
The exact causes of transverse myelitis are not known.
The inflammation that damages the spinal cord may result from viral infections, abnormal immune reactions, or insufficient blood flow through the blood vessels located in the spinal cord.
Transverse myelitis may also occur as a complication of syphilis, measles, and Lyme disease.
The National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke does not list vaccines as a trigger.
Transverse myelitis often develops following viral infections due to varicella zoster (the virus that causes chickenpox and shingles), herpes simplex, Epstein-Barr, influenza, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis A, or rubella.
Bacterial skin infections, middle-ear infections, and bacterial pneumonia have also been linked with TM.
Some experts believe that infection causes a derangement of the immune system, which leads to an indirect autoimmune attack on the spinal cord.
The immune system, which normally protects the body from foreign organisms, mistakenly attacks the body’s own tissue, which causes inflammation and, in some cases, damage to the spinal cord myelin.
As with many disorders of the spinal cord, no effective cure exists for people with transverse myelitis.
The best medicine has to offer is symptom management.
Therapy generally begins when the patient first experiences symptoms.
Physicians may prescribe steroids during the first few weeks of illness to decrease inflammation.
The goal is to keep the body functioning, hoping for complete or partial spontaneous recovery of the nervous system.
Some who don’t respond to steroids may undergo plasma exchange therapy (plasmapheresis).
This involves replacing plasma, thus removing antibodies that may be involved in inflammation.
People with acute symptoms, such as paralysis, are most often treated in a hospital or in a rehabilitation facility under the care of a specialized medical team.
Later, if patients begin to recover limb control, physical therapy to help improve muscle strength, coordination, and range of motion begins.
Transverse myelitis usually includes the following symptoms: (1) weakness of the legs and arms, (2) pain, (3) sensory alteration, and (4) bowel and bladder dysfunction.
Most patients will experience weakness of varying degrees in their legs; some also experience it in their arms.
Pain is the primary symptom of transverse myelitis in about half of all patients.
The pain may be localized in the lower back or may consist of sharp sensations that shoot down the legs or arms or around the torso.
Most people with transverse myelitis report heightened sensitivity to heat, cold, or touch; for some a light touch with a finger may cause significant pain (called allodynia).
Recovery from transverse myelitis usually begins within two to 12 weeks of the onset of symptoms and may continue for up to two years.
However, if there is no improvement within the first three to six months, significant recovery is unlikely.
About one-third of people affected with TM experience good or full recovery.
Another one-third show fair recovery and are left with deficits such as spastic gait, sensory dysfunction, and urinary urgency or incontinence.
The remaining one-third show little functional recovery.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) supports research to clarify the role of the immune system in TM and other autoimmune diseases or disorders.
Other work focuses on strategies to repair demyelinated spinal cords, including approaches using cell transplantation.
The ultimate goals of these studies are to encourage regeneration and to restore function to patients dealing with paralysis.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), Transverse Myelitis Association
Johns Hopkins Myelitis and Myelopathy Center provides comprehensive diagnostic evaluations and symptom management for the full spectrum of myelitis and myelopathy disorders, including transverse myelitis.
The center’s team includes physicians and healthcare experts in various disciplines, including neurology, urology, rheumatology, orthopedic surgery, neuroradiology, rehabilitation medicine, and physical and occupational therapy. https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/neurology-neurosurgery/specialty-areas/%20myelitis-myelopathy
Siegel Rare Neuroimmune Association (SRNA) features news and information for the TM community; facilitates support and networking. https://wearesrna.org
Tony Award-winning actress Ali Stroker by Christopher Voelker
Advances in technique have made surgical treatment of most cases of AVM safe and effective.